 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 7.2 
 
Condensate and Feedwater System
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-1 Rev 0403 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
7.2 CONDENSATE AND FEEDWATER SYSTEM .............................................. 7.2-1 
 
7.2.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... 7.2-1 
 
7.2.2 System Description .............................................................................. 7.2-2 
 
7.2.2.1 Condensate System ............................................................... 7.2-2 
7.2.2.2 Feedwater System .................................................................. 7.2-4 
7.2.2.3 Heater Drain System .............................................................. 7.2-5 
7.2.2.4 Steam Generator C hemistry Control ...................................... 7.2-5 
 
7.2.3 Component Descriptions ...................................................................... 7.2-6 
 
7.2.3.1 Condensate Syst em Components .......................................... 7.2-6 
7.2.3.2 Feedwater Syst em Components ............................................ 7.2-9 
7.2.3.3 Startup Auxiliary Feedwater Pump ....................................... 7.2-11 
7.2.3.4 Heater Drain Sy stem Components ....................................... 7.2-11 
7.2.3.5 Condensate Storag e Tank (CST) ......................................... 7.2-14 
 
7.2.4 System O peration .............................................................................. 7.2-14 
 
7.2.5 PRA Insights ...................................................................................... 7.2-15 
 
7.2.6 Summary  ............................................................................................ 7.2-16 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
7.2-1 ............................................................ Simplified Condensate and Feed System 
7.2-2 ............................................................................................. Condensate System 
7.2-3 ...................................................................... Condensate Demineralizer System 
7.2-4 ................................................................................................ Feedwater Heater 
7.2-5 ............................................................................................... Feedwater System 
7.2-6 ..........................................................Moisture Separator / High Pressure Drains 
7.2-7 ................................................................................ Low Pressure Heater Drains 
7.2-8 ................................................................... Steam Generator Blowdown System 
7.2-9 .................................................. Condensers A, B, & C Front View (Facing East) 
7.2-10 ............................................................................. Circulating Water (Top View) 
7.2-11 ..................................................................................... Main Air Ejector System 
7.2-12 ........................................................................................... Condenser Hotwells 
7.2-13 ..................................................................... Startup Auxiliary Feedwater Pump 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-2 Rev 0403 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-1 Rev 0403 
7.2 CONDENSATE AND FEEDWATER SYSTEM  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. List in proper flowpath order and state the purpose of the following condensate 
and feedwater system components: 
 
a. Condenser 
b. Condensate (hotwell) pumps 
c. Demineralizers 
d. Low pressure feedwater heaters 
e. Main feed pumps (MFPs) 
f. High pressure feedwater heaters 
g. Feedwater regulating and bypass valves 
h. Feedwater isolation valves (FWIVs) 
i. Steam generators 
j. Startup auxiliary feedwater (AFW) pump 
k. Heater drain system 
l. Condensate storage tank (CST) 
 
2. List the components and connections located in the Seismic Category I portion 
of the feedwater system piping, and explain the purpose of each. 
 
3. Explain how cascading heater drains increase plant efficiency. 
 
 
7.2.1 Introduction  
 
The purposes of the condensate and feedwater system are as follows: 
 
1. To transfer water from the main condenser to the steam generators and to 
preheat it, 
2. To collect and distribute heater drains, and 
3. To purify secondary water and to maintain secondary chemistry control. 
 
The condensate and feedwater system returns the condensed low pressure turbine 
exhaust steam from the main condenser to the steam generators.  The simplified 
flow path for this system is shown in Figure 7.2-1.  The condensed turbine exhaust 
steam is collected in the hotwell sections of the main condenser.  Each motor-driven 
condensate (hotwell) pump takes suction on the hotwell and pumps the condensate 
through the low pressure feedwater heaters.  The condensate flow can be directed 
through the condensate demineralizers.  The condensate demineralizers (ion 
exchangers) remove soluble impurities from the condensate.  The low pressure 
heaters increase the temperature of the condensate before it reaches the suction of 
the main feedwater pumps.   
 
The turbine-driven feedwater pumps increase the pressure of the condensate, now 
called feedwater, to a pressure greater than steam generator pressure and direct 
the feedwater to the steam generators.  Before it reaches the steam generators, the 
feedwater passes through the high pressure feedwater heaters, the feedwater 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-2 Rev 0403 
regulating valves, and the feedwater isolation valves.  The high pressure heaters 
provide the final heating of the feedwater, the feedwater regulating valves control 
the water levels in the steam generators, and the feedwater isolation valves provide 
the means by which the safety-grade portions of the feedwater system can be 
isolated from the nonsafety-grade portions during accidents and certain transients.  
In the steam generators, the feedwater is converted to steam, and the secondary 
cycle is repeated.  
 
In this section, detailed descriptions of the following topics are provided:  
 
$ Condensate system, 
$ Feedwater system, 
$ Heater drain system, and 
$ Secondary chemistry control. 
 
 
7.2.2 System Description 
 
7.2.2.1 Condensate System  
 
The condensate system preheats, pressurizes, and purifies the condensate 
collected in the main condenser and transports it to the suctions of the main 
feedwater pumps.  Refer to Figure 7.2-2.  The condensate system contains two 70% 
capacity, motor-driven pumps, the condensate demineralizers, and five stages of 
low pressure feedwater heating. 
 
The main condenser condenses and collects steam from the low pressure turbine 
exhaust and/or the steam dump system (Chapter 11.2).  The heat sink required to 
condense the steam is provided by the circulating water system (Chapter 14.3).  The 
circulating water flows through the inside of the condenser tubes, and the exhaust 
steam is condensed on the outside of the tubes.  The condensed steam 
(condensate) is collected in the three hotwell sections (hotwells A, B, and C) of the 
main condenser.  
 
The hotwells provide a storage reservoir for the condensate system.  This system is 
shown in detail in Figure 7.2-2.  Each of the three condenser hotwells is divided into 
A train and B train sections.  The A and B train sections are interconnected, and the 
trains are cross-connected at the B condenser hotwell.  Each condensate pump 
takes suction on its associated train of hotwell sections and raises the pressure of 
the condensate.  Downstream of the condensate pumps are connections to the 
condensate demineralizers.   
 
The condensate demineralizer system consists of eight demineralizers containing 
filters coated with resin (precoat) as well as systems for removing spent precoat and 
applying fresh precoat.  Refer to Figure 7.2-3.  Each demineralizer vessel is a 
cylindrical tank with a bottom head, 6 ft in diameter and 10.8 ft in overall height.  The 
vessels are made of carbon steel with epoxy phenolic coatings.  Each vessel holds 
420 nylon filter elements coated with ion exchange resin.  The condensate passes 
through the precoat material first and then through the filters; the condensate is thus 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-3 Rev 0403 
purified via ion exchange and filtration.  Each vessel can treat 4317 gpm of 
condensate at 134.5°F and 565 psig. 
 
During normal operation, six vessels contain precoat material consisting of ammonia 
cation and hydroxide anion resins, while a seventh vessel contains precoat material 
consisting of hydrogen cation and hydroxide anion resins.  The first six vessels are 
capable of full condensate flow, while the flow through the seventh demineralizer is 
throttled manually to maintain condensate pH between 9.3 and 9.6.  (The eighth 
demineralizer would be in standby or undergoing replacement of spent precoat.)   
 
The condensate demineralizer system has a flow balancing controller which ensures 
equal flow through all demineralizers that are maintained in automatic operation.  
Without flow balancing, the ?cleaner@ demineralizers would pass more flow than the 
?dirtier@ ones, due to the differential pressures (ΔPs) across the filter elements; 
eventually all demineralizers would be equally dirty.  This condition would 
necessitate replacement of the precoat in all demineralizers at the same time.  As a 
demineralizer=s precoat is exhausted, the conductivity of the vessel contents and the 
ΔP across the vessel increase.  The condensate demineralizer bypass valves will 
open automatically if the ΔP across any demineralizer exceeds 60 psid. 
 
When demineralizer conditions necessitate precoat replacement, the demineralizer 
is removed from service.  The spent precoat is back washed from the filter elements 
with water from the CST.  The resultant resin-water mixture is drained to the 
backwash receiver tank for processing.  Fresh anion and cation resins are then 
combined as a slurry and pumped into the demineralizer vessel by the precoat 
pump. 
 
The demineralizers are not normally in service continuously because morpholine, 
used to control secondary pH (see Section 7.2.2.4), exhausts demineralizer resin at 
a high rate.  During at-power operation, the demineralizers are placed in service 
when there are condenser tube leaks or when some contaminant has been 
introduced into the secondary.  Condensate flow through the demineralizers is 
established on either a single-train or two-train basis by closing either or both of the 
condensate demineralizer bypass valves.  During a startup, condensate (feed) flow 
is recirculated to the condenser via the demineralizers to establish the appropriate 
secondary chemistry parameters. 
 
Downstream of the connections to the condensate demineralizer system are five 
stages of low pressure heaters.  Refer to Figure 7.2-2.  In each condensate train, 
the first two stages of heating consist of three parallel paths of two heaters each; the 
condensate flow then converges and passes through three single-heater stages.  
The 12 heaters which comprise the first 2 stages of heating are located in the 
condenser shells.  Each train of low pressure heaters can only be isolated at the 
outlet of the fifth-stage heater.  Therefore, in order to repair one heater, all first- 
through fifth-stage heaters in the associated string must be taken out of service.  If a 
string of heaters is taken out of service, power must be reduced to 70% or less.  
 
All feedwater heaters are U-tube heat exchangers.  Refer to Figure 7.2-4.  The 
shells are carbon steel, and the tubes are stainless steel.  Steam enters the shell 
side of each heater, and condensate flows through the U tubes.  The steam passes 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-4 Rev 0403 
over the tubes and heats the condensate.  The condensed steam collects in the 
drain cooler section of the heat exchanger.  The drain cooler is a water-to-water 
heat exchanger formed within the heater shell by a baffle which envelopes some of 
the tubes at the condensate (or feedwater) inlet.  The condensed heating steam is 
subcooled there before it drains from the heater.  The heater drain system is 
discussed in Section 7.2.2.3. 
 
The first five stages of feedwater heating increase the condensate temperature from 
120EF to 360EF.  Heating steam for the first four stages of feedwater heating is 
supplied by extraction steam from the low pressure turbine.  Steam for the first-, 
second-, third-, and fourth-stage heaters is taken from the eleventh, tenth, eighth, 
and seventh stages of the low pressure turbines, respectively.  Steam for the fifth-
stage heaters is taken from the high pressure turbine exhaust.  Preheating the 
condensate (feedwater) results in an efficiency gain of approximately 15% over non-
preheating systems. 
 
The discharges of the low pressure heater trains are cross-connected by a 16-in. 
header.  The heater drain pumps also discharge to this header.  The combined 
condensate and heater drain flow provides the suction for the main feed pumps. 
 
7.2.2.2 Feedwater System  
 
The feedwater system preheats and pressurizes the discharge from the condensate 
system and the heater drain pumps and transports it to the steam generators.  The 
feedwater system extends from the feed pump suction valves to the inlets of the 
steam generators.  Refer to Figure 7.2-5.  The feedwater system includes two 70% 
capacity, variable speed, turbine-driven pumps and two trains of high pressure 
feedwater heaters. 
 
The MFPs discharge to the high pressure feedwater heaters via cross-connected 
headers.  The high pressure heaters consist of two trains of two heaters each.  The 
high pressure heaters are U-tube heat exchangers constructed of carbon steel 
shells and stainless steel tubes.  The heaters have integral drain coolers and a tube-
side (feedwater) design pressure of 1700 psig.  The feedwater temperature is raised 
from 360EF to 397EF in the sixth-stage heaters and to 440EF in the seventh-stage 
heaters.  The extraction steam supplying these heaters is taken from the fourth 
stage of the high pressure turbine for the sixth-stage heaters and from the second 
stage of the high pressure turbine for the seventh-stage heaters.  One high pressure 
feedwater heater string can be isolated, provided that plant power is first reduced to 
95% or less. 
 
Feedwater from the high pressure heater trains flows into a common 30-in. feed 
header.  This common header contains a pressure transmitter (PT-508) which 
provides indication on the main control board and an input to the MFP speed control 
system.  The header also contains a recirculation line to the main condenser.  This 
line directs recirculation of feedwater for demineralization, deaeration, and filtration 
of the feedwater during plant startups.  The recirculation line isolation valve is shut 
during normal at-power operation. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-5 Rev 0403 
The common feed header splits into four 14-in. feed lines which supply the 
individual steam generators.  Each feed line contains a 14-in. feedwater regulating 
valve and a 6-in. bypass valve in parallel.  Each feedwater regulating valve has an 
automatic control system which is discussed in detail in Chapter 11.1.  The bypass 
valves are operated manually.  Immediately downstream of each feedwater 
regulating and bypass valve is a feedwater isolation valve (FWIV). 
 
From the first piping restraints upstream of each set of FWIVs to the steam 
generator feedwater inlet, the feedwater piping is Seismic Category I.  Downstream 
of the feedwater isolation valves, each feed line contains a flow venturi with two flow 
transmitters.  The function of the flow transmitters is discussed in Chapter 11.1.  
Downstream of each venturi is a check valve.  The check valve prevents the loss of 
steam generator inventory through an upstream feedwater system break.   
Downstream of the check valve are connections for shutdown chemistry addition 
and for auxiliary feedwater entry. 
 
7.2.2.3 Heater Drain System 
 
The heater drain system collects condensed steam from the moisture separator 
reheaters (MSRs) and from the high and low pressure feedwater heaters and 
returns it to the condensate and feedwater system.  Refer to Figures 7.2-6 and 7.2-
7.   
 
The drains from the seventh-stage heaters are cascaded or drained to the sixth-
stage heaters, which in turn drain to the fifth-stage heaters.  The cascading effect 
ends with the fifth-stage heaters; they drain to the heater drain tanks.  Two heater 
drain pumps transport the collected drains from the heater drain tanks to the 
condensate system cross-connect header downstream of the low pressure heaters. 
During full-power operation, the heater drain pumps supply about one third of the 
total flow at the suctions of the MFPs.  Plant power is limited to 90% with only one 
operating heater drain pump. 
 
The drains from the low pressure heaters are also cascaded.  The fourth-stage 
heaters drain to the third-stage heaters, the third-stage heaters drain to the second-
stage heaters, the second-stage heaters drain to the first-stage heaters, and the 
first-stage heaters drain to the main condenser.  The cascading of heater drains 
improves secondary plant efficiency by allowing the repeated use of relatively hot 
water for feedwater heating; if each heater were to drain directly to the condenser, a 
great deal of energy would be lost from the system.  Preheating of the feedwater by 
extraction steam and heater drains means that nearly all of the energy transferred to 
the feedwater in the steam generators by the reactor coolant system is added as the 
latent heat of vaporization; comparatively little sensible heating is required to bring 
the feedwater to saturation.   
 
7.2.2.4 Steam Generator Chemistry Control  
 
During plant operation the control of steam generator chemistry is accomplished by 
the purification of condensate, by the injection of chemicals into the condensate 
system to scavenge oxygen and to control pH, and by steam generator blowdown.  
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-6 Rev 0403 
Purification of the condensate is performed by the condensate demineralizer system 
through the ionic exchange process.  Ionic impurities (from condenser tube leaks, 
poor-quality makeup water, etc.) in the condensate system are removed on an as-
needed basis by placing the demineralizers in service.  
 
Chemical injection of hydrazine (N
2H4) for oxygen control and morpholine (C4H9NO) 
for pH control contributes to steam generator chemistry control by minimizing 
corrosion.  Morpholine injection is secured when the condensate demineralizer 
system is placed in service, and secondary pH is affected by hydrazine addition only 
(some of the hydrazine decomposes into ammonia [NH
3], a weak base).  These 
chemicals are pumped into a low temperature portion of the condensate system just 
downstream of the demineralizer system connections (see Figure 7.2-2) to prevent 
the breakdown of hydrazine.  Separate connections for shutdown chemical addition 
are immediately upstream of the feedwater containment penetrations (see Figure 
7.2-5).  The volatility of the chemical treatment prevents undesirable chemical 
concentrations in the steam generators.  
 
Each steam generator acts as a chemical concentrator.  The boiling of the 
feedwater leaves concentrated impurities in the steam generator, which are 
removed by the steam generator blowdown system.  The blowdown system, as 
shown in Figure 7.2-8, consists of blowdown taps from each steam generator, 
isolation valves, blowdown flow control valves, a blowdown tank, a heat exchanger, 
a pump, blowdown ion exchangers and filter, a radiation monitor, and piping for 
blowdown discharge to the condenser and to the environment.  
 
The function of the steam generator blowdown system is to maintain the steam 
generator secondary-side water within the chemical specifications prescribed, while 
treating the blowdown for return to the condenser.  Primarily, the steam generator 
blowdown system will remove impurities that come from sources such as primary-to-
secondary leakage, main condenser leakage, and corrosion products. 
 
The blowdown flow rate from each of the four steam generators is individually, 
manually controlled (100 gpm maximum per steam generator).  The blowdown water 
entering the blowdown tank undergoes a pressure drop across the blowdown flow 
control valves; some of the water flashes to steam.  Most of the steam is condensed 
by the water in the tank, the rest is directed to the condenser (< 50% power), to 
feedwater heater 3B (> 50% power), or to the atmosphere (condenser not 
available).  The liquid effluent from the blowdown tank is cooled in the blowdown 
heat exchanger (service water is the heat sink), purified, and filtered before being 
discharged to the condenser or to the environment. 
 
 
7.2.3 Component Descriptions 
 
7.2.3.1 Condensate System Components 
 
Main Condenser 
 
The main condenser is a single-pass, three-shell, multipressure, deaerating, surface 
condenser.  Each shell is located below one of the three low pressure turbines.  The 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-7 Rev 0403 
condenser tubes are arranged in bundles which cross the condenser shells 
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the main turbine.  Refer to Figure 7.2-9. 
 
Each condenser shell is connected to its associated low pressure turbine =s outer 
casing by an expansion bellows, which isolates turbine expansion and vibration from 
the condenser.  The first- and second-stage feedwater heaters are located in the 
upper portion of each condenser shell just below the entry of turbine exhaust.  This 
area of the condenser shell is called the neck.  Each of the low pressure heater 
trains has first- and second-stage heaters located inside each condenser shell.  
Each pair of first- and second-stage heaters is installed within a single shell, so that 
each condenser shell actually contains two heater shells.  This arrangement saves 
floor space, reduces the insulation required for the heaters, and allows shorter 
piping runs.  Below the low pressure heaters are the tube bundles.  
 
The main condenser tubes are constructed of titanium, which is virtually impervious 
to corrosion.  (The condensers at several plants have been retrofitted with titanium 
tubes for improved corrosion performance.)  Each of the approximately 60,000 
tubes is 1.25 in. in diameter; tube lengths vary between condenser shells.  A 
different pressure is maintained in each of the three shells.  The shells are designed 
to operate at the following pressures at full power: 3.30 in. Hg for the low pressure 
(A) shell, 4.00 in. Hg for the intermediate pressure (B) shell, and 5.11 in. Hg for the 
high pressure (C) shell.  The interconnected hotwells below the three shells are 
maintained at a pressure of 6.73 in. Hg.  
 
Circulating water flows through the three condenser shells in series, entering first 
the low pressure shell, then the intermediate pressure shell, and finally the high 
pressure shell.  Refer to Figure 7.2-10.  The circulating water is heated as it flows 
through the shells.  In order to maintain the heat transfer capability of each 
condenser shell approximately equal, the heat transfer surface area increases in the 
direction of circulating water flow.  Each shell has the same number of tubes; 
different heat transfer areas are accomplished with different tube lengths.  The tube 
lengths are 35 ft in the low pressure shell, 45 ft in the intermediate pressure shell, 
and 55 ft in the high pressure shell.  The total heat transfer surface area of the 
condenser is approximately 900,000 ft
2.  The tubes are supported by divider plates 
spaced along their length.  The tubes are welded to tube sheets attached to the inlet 
and outlet water boxes. 
 
At the center of each tube bundle is a gas collecting space.  Noncondensible gases 
are directed across the relatively cold central tubes and then routed through air off-
take piping that penetrates the inlet water boxes.  The air off-take pipes of the three 
shells are connected in parallel.  Noncondensible gases are then directed to the 
suctions of the air ejector assemblies.  If gases were not removed, a reduction in 
vacuum and a loss of turbine efficiency would result. 
 
Gases leaking into the condenser or being stripped from the condensate can 
blanket the condenser tubes.  This would reduce the heat transfer capability of the 
condenser.  The condenser air removal system removes air and noncondensible 
gases from the condenser shells.  During plant startups the three hogging air 
ejectors draw air from the condenser shells to establish the initial condenser 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-8 Rev 0403 
vacuum.  During plant operations one or both of the main air ejector assemblies 
maintain a minimum condenser vacuum of 25 in. Hg.  Refer to Figure 7.2-11. 
 
The air ejectors are jet pumps supplied with main steam through a reducing valve.  
The two 100% capacity, two-stage main air ejector assemblies exhaust to the 
turbine roof via inter and after condensers and the off-gas system.  Conductivity 
monitors are placed on the inter and after condenser drains to detect condenser 
tube leaks.  A radiation monitor samples gases in the off-gas system prior to their 
release above the turbine building roof, and gases can be directed through a 
charcoal adsorber if necessary.  The 1200-scfm, single-stage hogging air ejectors 
exhaust directly to the atmosphere outside the turbine building. 
 
Condensed water in the condenser shells collects below the tube bundles on 
intermediate bottom plates in the hotwells.  Refer to Figure 7.2-12.  Condensers A 
and B have two such plates, which form intermediate and lower hotwell sections, 
while condenser C has only one.  At each intermediate bottom plate, the 
condensate flows into sumps which contain heatup devices, each of which is a 
series of perforated plates.  The plates break up the condensate into droplets which 
are heated as they fall through steam.  In the lower hotwell section of each 
condenser, the steam is provided by feed pump turbine exhaust.  The feed pump 
turbine exhaust is piped to the lower hotwell of condenser C first and then to the 
lower hotwells of the other two condensers via steam crossover piping.  Some of the 
feed pump turbine exhaust steam is directed from the condenser C lower hotwell 
into the condenser C shell.  Similarly, heating steam from the condenser C shell is 
supplied to the intermediate hotwells of the other two condensers via crossover 
piping.  The steam passages are sized and orificed so that, at design load and 
circulating water temperature, the appropriate pressures are maintained in the 
various sections of the condensers. 
 
The lower hotwell of each condenser is divided into train A and train B sections by a 
longitudinal plate.  The train A sections are interconnected, as are the train B 
sections.  The longitudinal plate in the B condenser hotwell has a hole to equalize 
the levels in the two hotwell sections.  Condenser B has separate train A and train B 
hotwell level control systems, only one of which is in service at any time due to the 
level balancing in the B condenser hotwell described above.  As the other 
condenser hotwells are connected to the condenser B hotwell, controlling the B 
hotwell level provides control of the entire condenser hotwell inventory.  Inventory 
control is discussed in more detail in Section 7.2.3.5.  The train A and train B 
condensate pumps take suction on the condenser B train A and train B hotwell 
sections, respectively.  
 
Condensate (Hotwell) Pumps 
 
Two condensate pumps take suction on condenser B through suction strainers and 
manual isolation valves.  The pumps are eight-stage, vertical, centrifugal pumps 
driven by 3950-hp motors.  The pumps are powered from 12.47-kVac service buses. 
The thrust and upper guide bearings of the pump motors are oil lubricated; the 
motor oil coolers are cooled by the bearing cooling water system.  Each pump =s 
lower radial bearing is grease lubricated and air cooled.  Cooling water for the 
condensate pump shaft seals is supplied by the condensate transfer pumps.  Each 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-9 Rev 0403 
condensate pump supplies 11,000 gpm with 1100 ft of head (approximately 477 
psi). 
 
The discharge of each pump is provided with a recirculation line to the hotwell of 
condenser B to protect the pump from overheating.  The recirculation valve in each 
line is controlled as a function of the associated pump =s discharge flow.  Each valve 
opens with a discharge flow rate of 3500 gpm and closes with a flow rate of 7000 
gpm.  The recirculation valves are automatically opened by a feedwater isolation 
signal. 
 
Operation with the condensate demineralizers bypassed causes an increase in the 
discharge pressure of the condensate pumps due to the reduced flow resistance.  
The increased pressure at the discharge of the heater drain pumps decreases the 
flow from the heater drain tank, resulting in the loss of heater drain tank level 
control.  To avoid this effect, with the demineralizers bypassed the recirculation 
valve for one condensate pump is manually opened about 50%, thereby reducing 
condensate pump discharge pressure and increasing heater drain pump flow. 
 
The discharge of each pump is equipped with a motor-operated isolation valve, 
which is manually operated from the main control board.  The isolation valve is 
closed when the pump is off and opened after the pump is started.  Downstream of 
the discharge isolation valves and the discharge flow elements, the condensate 
trains are cross-connected by a 24-in. line.  The discharge of each pump can be 
aligned to the condensate demineralizer system.  The discharge of condensate 
pump B also supplies the MFP seal water system and the heater drain pump seals. 
 
7.2.3.2 Feedwater System Components  
 
Main Feedwater Pumps  
 
The MFPs are horizontal, single-stage, centrifugal pumps, each coupled to a nine-
stage impulse turbine.  Each pump has a dedicated lubricating oil system for its 
bearings.  Each pump has a variable capacity up to 19,800 gpm with a discharge 
head of 2020 ft.  Each pump can support operation up to 70% of main turbine load.  
An independent speed controller, operated automatically or manually, is provided for 
each pump.  The turbine speed is varied to maintain a programmed ΔP across the 
feedwater regulating valves.  The MFP speed control program is discussed in 
Chapter 11.1. 
 
Each MFP turbine is supplied with steam from the main steam bypass header during 
startups and low-load operations and with reheated steam from one MSR during 
normal operation at higher loads.  Steam is supplied via a dual control valve system, 
with one control valve from each steam supply.   
 
The control valve from the main steam (high pressure) supply does not begin to 
open until the control valve from the MSR (low pressure) supply is fully open.  
During low-load and startup conditions, both turbine control valves are open, with 
the main steam supply controlling MFP speed.  At higher load conditions, the MSR 
supply pressure will be high enough to handle any demands on the MFPs, and the 
main steam supply control valve for each pump will be fully shut.The MFPs are 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-10 Rev 0403 
equipped with protective trips, some of which trip an individual pump and some of 
which trip both pumps.  The following is a list of individual MFP trips: 
 
$ Low lubricating oil pressure (5 psig), 
$ Turbine overspeed (5850 rpm), 
$ Low turbine exhaust vacuum (20 in. Hg), 
$ High turbine exhaust temperature (230 EF), 
$ Excessive thrust bearing wear, 
$ High discharge pressure (1850 psig), 
$ Suction isolation valve not fully open, and 
$ Associated condensate pump trip. 
 
Any of the following conditions will cause a trip of both MFPs: 
 
$ Engineered safety features actuation signal, 
$ High steam generator level (69.0%), as sensed by two out of three level 
detectors on any steam generator, and 
$ Low suction pressure (195 psig). 
 
Each MFP has a recirculation line to condenser C.  The lines ensure minimum flow 
through the pumps.  The minimum flow valves are automatically controlled by 
suction flow transmitters.  Each recirculation valve opens when the flow through its 
associated pump drops to less than 4000 gpm, and it closes when the flow 
increases above 9000 gpm.  The recirculation valves automatically open with a 
feedwater isolation signal.  
 
Feedwater Isolation Valves (FWIVs) 
 
Immediately downstream of each feedwater regulating valve and each bypass valve 
is an FWIV.  (An FWIV for each regulating and bypass valve is specific to the Trojan 
plant design; Westinghouse design plants more typically have one FWIV for each 
steam generator, i.e., one FWIV for each regulating valve/bypass valve pair.)  The 
valves have hydraulic operators; a nitrogen-charged accumulator supplies the 
hydraulic fluid for each valve.  Each accumulator is capable of one closure and one 
opening of its associated FWIV before hydraulic pressure is restored.  The valves 
have a maximum closing time of 16 seconds. 
 
The FWIVs are automatically closed by a feedwater isolation signal, which is 
generated by any of the following:  
 
$ High steam generator level (69.0%), as sensed by two out of three level 
detectors on any steam generator, 
$ Engineered safety features actuation signal, and 
$ Reactor trip (P-4) and low T
avg (564EF), as sensed in two out of four reactor 
coolant loops. 
 
Each FWIV can also be manually opened or closed at a control panel in the turbine 
building.  (Controls for the FWIVs are more typically located in the main control 
room at a Westinghouse design plant.) 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-11 Rev 0403 
7.2.3.3 Startup Auxiliary Feedwater Pump  
 
To avoid wear and tear on the safety-grade auxiliary feedwater (AFW) pumps, a 
nonsafety-grade startup AFW pump provides feed flow to the steam generators 
during normal startups and shutdown periods, when main steam and MSR steam 
are not available.  The 1250-hp, motor-driven, eight-stage centrifugal pump supplies 
1020 gpm (including 140 gpm of recirculation flow) at a discharge head of 3400 ft 
(1472 psi).  The pump has no automatic start features.  It is normally powered from 
a plant service bus but can be aligned to diesel generator A. 
 
The startup AFW pump takes suction on the condensate storage tank and 
discharges to the discharge line of either the diesel-driven or turbine-driven AFW 
pump.  Refer to Figure 7.2-13.  An isolation valve for each discharge path is 
provided; one must be shut during operation of the startup AFW pump to ensure 
separation of the two safety-grade AFW trains.  Upstream of the discharge isolation 
valves is a manually or automatically controlled flow control valve.  In automatic, the 
control system throttles flow to maintain a selected ΔP between the pump discharge 
and steam generator C.  The normal setpoint is 100 psid.  
 
7.2.3.4 Heater Drai n System Components 
 
The heater drain system collects the condensate from the feedwater heaters and 
MSRs and returns it to the condensate and feedwater system.  Refer to Figures 7.2-
6 and 7.2-7.  The system consists of six drain tanks for the two MSRs and 
associated piping, the feedwater heater shells and associated piping, two heater 
drain tank pumps, and two heater drain tanks. 
 
Moisture Separator Reheater Drains 
 
Each MSR has three drain tanks:  one for the condensate from the first-stage heater 
tubes (first-stage reheater drain tank), one for the condensate from the second-
stage heater tubes (second-stage reheater drain tank), and one for the condensate 
from the MSR shell (moisture separator drain tank).  These drain tanks are located 
below the MSR shells and function to provide a seal between the high pressure 
steam in the MSRs and the lower pressure feedwater heater shells or heater drain 
tanks to which they drain.  Each drain tank has a level control system to maintain 
the water seal.  
 
The second-stage reheater drain tanks receive the condensate from the MSR 
second-stage reheater tubes.  These tanks normally drain to the seventh-stage 
feedwater heater shells.  The drain flow from each tank is automatically controlled to 
maintain tank level.  The level control valve closes automatically on a high level in 
the associated seventh-stage heater shell, regardless of tank level.  A high drain 
tank level causes its alternate drain valve to open, allowing the tank to drain to one 
of the heater drain tanks. 
 
The first-stage reheater drain tanks receive the condensate from the MSR first-stage 
reheater tubes.  These tanks normally drain to the sixth-stage feedwater heater 
shells.  The drain flow from each tank is automatically controlled to maintain tank 
level.  The level control valve closes automatically on a high level in the associated 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-12 Rev 0403 
sixth-stage heater shell, regardless of tank level.  A high drain tank level causes its 
alternate drain valve to open, allowing the tank to drain to one of the heater drain 
tanks. 
 
The moisture separator drain tanks receive drains from the MSR shells.  This 
condensate is the moisture removed from the cold reheat steam by the chevron 
separators in the MSRs.  The drain flow into each tank is about 1.5 x 10
6 lbm/hr at 
100% load.  These tanks normally drain to the heater drain tanks.  The drain flow 
from each moisture separator drain tank is automatically controlled to maintain tank 
level.  A high moisture separator drain tank level causes its alternate drain valve to 
open, allowing the tank to drain to condenser A.  
 
Each of the six MSR drain tanks is vented to the source of the drains to remove 
noncondensible gases. 
 
High Pressure Heater Drains 
 
The seventh-stage heater shells receive heating steam from the second stage of the 
high pressure turbine and drains from the second-stage reheater drain tanks.  
These heaters normally drain to the sixth-stage heater shells.  The drain flow from 
each seventh-stage heater is automatically controlled to maintain shell level.  The 
level control valve closes automatically on a high level in the associated sixth-stage 
heater shell, regardless of the seventh-stage shell level.  A high shell level causes 
the heater=s alternate drain valve to open, allowing the heater to drain to a heater 
drain tank.  A very high shell level causes the drain and extraction steam inlets to 
the heater to isolate. 
 
The sixth-stage heater shells receive heating steam from the fourth stage of the high 
pressure turbine and drains from the first-stage reheater drain tanks and seventh-
stage heaters.  These heaters normally drain to the fifth-stage heater shells.  The 
drain flow from each sixth-stage heater is automatically controlled to maintain shell 
level.  The level control valve closes automatically on a high level in the associated 
fifth-stage heater shell, regardless of the sixth-stage shell level.  A high shell level 
causes the heater=s alternate drain valve to open, allowing the heater to drain to a 
heater drain tank.  A very high shell level causes the drain and extraction steam 
inlets to the heater to isolate.  
 
The fifth-stage heater shells receive heating steam from high pressure turbine 
exhaust and drains from the sixth-stage heaters.  These heaters have no drain 
coolers and drain directly to the heater drain tanks without level control.  A very high 
fifth-stage shell level causes the drain and extraction steam inlets to the heater to 
isolate. 
 
Heater Drain Tanks and Pumps 
 
The heater drain tanks are horizontal 13,120-gal tanks.  Each tank normally receives 
drains from its associated fifth-stage heater and moisture separator drain tank.  
Each tank also receives alternate drains from the associated sixth- and seventh-
stage heaters and first- and second-stage reheater drain tanks.  Each tank is 
designed for 220 psig and 400°F.  The tanks are cross-connected by a 20-in. line.  A 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-13 Rev 0403 
dump valve which taps off the cross-connection drains the tanks to condenser A on 
a high level in either tank. 
 
Each heater drain pump takes suction on one of the heater drain tanks.  The pumps 
are canned-suction, vertical, centrifugal pumps rated at 5950 gpm and 575 psig.  
The pumps are powered from station service buses.  The heater drain pump seals 
are supplied with cooling water from the condensate pumps.   
 
A heater drain tank level control system maintains levels in the tanks by controlling 
the heater drain pump discharge valves.  If the combined pump discharge flow is 
less than 2400 gpm, the recirculation lines to the heater drain tanks open to prevent 
pump overheating.  The pumps discharge into a combined header which taps into 
the condensate cross-connect header just upstream of the MFP suctions.   
 
Low Pressure Heater Drains 
 
The control of inputs to and outputs from the low pressure heaters is similar to that 
of the high pressure heaters.  The fourth-stage heater shells receive heating steam 
from the seventh stage of the low pressure turbines.  These heaters normally drain 
to the third-stage heater shells.  The drain flow from each heater is automatically 
controlled to maintain shell level.  The level control valve closes automatically on a 
high level in the associated third-stage heater shell, regardless of the fourth-stage 
shell level.  A high shell level causes the heater=s alternate drain valve to open, 
allowing the heater to drain to condenser C.  A very high shell level causes the 
extraction steam inlet to the heater to isolate. 
 
The third-stage heater shells receive heating steam from the eighth stage of the low 
pressure turbines and drains from the fourth-stage heaters.  Each heater normally 
drains to the three second-stage heater shells of the same condensate train.  The 
drain flow from each heater is automatically controlled to maintain shell level.  The 
level control valve closes automatically on a high level in any of the associated 
second-stage heater shells, regardless of the third-stage shell level.  A high shell 
level causes the heater=s alternate drain valve to open, allowing the heater to drain 
to condenser C.  A very high shell level causes the extraction steam and drain inlets 
to the heater to isolate. 
 
As discussed in the main condenser description, each pair of first-and second-stage 
heaters is contained within a single shell, with the heaters separated by a 
longitudinal partition plate.  These heaters are located in the necks of the three 
condenser shells.  There are a total of 6 pairs of first- and second-stage heaters (12 
heaters total), one from each condensate train in each condenser shell. 
 
Each second-stage heater shell receives heating steam from the tenth stage of one 
low pressure turbine and about one third of the drains from its associated third-stage 
heater.  Each heater normally drains to the first-stage heater with which it is paired.  
The drain flow from each heater is automatically controlled to maintain shell level.  
The level control valve closes automatically on a high level in its associated first-
stage heater shell, regardless of the second-stage shell level.  A high shell level 
causes the heater=s alternate drain valve to open, allowing the heater to drain to the 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-14 Rev 0403 
condenser shell in which it is situated.  A very high shell level causes the drain inlet 
to the heater to isolate. 
 
Each first-stage heater shell receives heating steam from the eleventh stage of one 
low pressure turbine and drains from its associated second-stage heater.  Each 
heater normally drains to the condenser shell in which it is situated.  The drain flow 
from each heater is automatically controlled to maintain shell level.  A high shell 
level causes the heater=s alternate drain valve to open, which bypasses the normal 
level control valve.  A very high shell level causes the drain inlet to the heater to 
isolate. 
 
The first- and second-stage heaters do not have isolation valves for the incoming 
extraction steam.  The extraction steam supplies to these heaters are equipped with 
check valves designed to prevent reverse steam flow from the heaters to the low 
pressure turbines.  A large condensate tube leak could cause inflow to a heater 
shell in excess of the capacities of the normal level control and alternate drain 
valves.  In such an instance, water could back up into the extraction steam supply 
piping and leak past the check valve, causing damage to the affected low pressure 
turbine.  When the rate of tube leakage to  a heater shell exceeds the drain capacity, 
the condensate flow to that heater (and thus to the entire condensate train) must be 
isolated to prevent turbine damage.  
 
7.2.3.5 Condensate St orage Tank (CST) 
 
The CST is the source of makeup water for the condensate and feedwater system 
and also the primary source of water for the AFW system.  The CST is a covered, 
outdoor storage tank with a capacity of 450,000 gal.  Technical Specifications 
require a minimum stored volume of 239,000 gal, which accounts for 27,700 
unusable gal in the bottom of the tank and a 14,400-gal allowance for level 
instrument error.  This volume ensures that there is a sufficient supply for the AFW 
system to maintain the plant in hot standby for two hours and then to cool down the 
plant to 350EF in four hours.  The CST level transmitters provide indication, high- 
and low-level alarms, and low-level AFW pump trips.  
 
The in-service condenser hotwell level control system controls the condensate and 
feedwater system inventory by either rejecting condensate to or gravity draining 
water from the CST.  Figure 7.2-2 shows the components involved in level control.  
The normal setpoint for the hotwell level of condenser B is 24 in.  When the level 
reaches 28 in., the condensate reject valve downstream of one of the condensate 
pumps begins to open; the valve is fully open with a hotwell level of 40 in.  The 
makeup valve begins to open when the hotwell level falls to 21 in.; the valve is fully 
open with a hotwell level of 8 in.    
 
 
7.2.4 System Operation 
 
During the early stages of a plant startup, the startup AFW pump typically provides 
feed flow to the steam generators.  Decay heat and reactor coolant pump heat are 
transferred to the feedwater in the steam generators. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-15 Rev 0403 
As the temperature of the reactor coolant system increases toward the normal 
operating band, the condensate and feedwater system is readied for service.  If 
necessary, the system is filled and vented.  The fill water comes from the CST.  The 
lubricating oil systems for the two MFPs are verified operable and placed in service, 
in preparation for pump operation.  Next, one of the condensate pumps is started, 
and its associated discharge valve is opened.  The MFP recirculation valves are 
opened, allowing recirculation of condensate through the idle MFPs to the 
condenser hotwell.  Gland steam and seal water to the MFPs will be started at this 
time. 
 
Once a condensate pump has been placed in service, the condensate and 
feedwater system is aligned for secondary plant cleanup.  The startup recirculation 
valve is opened, and condensate flow is directed through the condensate 
demineralizers and throughout the system, up to the common feed header 
downstream of the high pressure heaters.  If the conditions warrant it, the 
recirculation flow can be limited to smaller portions of the system through the use of 
the condensate pump or MFP recirculation valves and the closing of appropriate 
isolation valves.  Secondary cleanup is continued until all secondary chemistry 
parameters are satisfied and within their respective limits.  The FWIVs remain 
closed during the cleanup process. 
 
Once reactor power has reached the point of adding heat, one of the MFPs is 
started.  The operator resets the feedwater isolation signal, closes the startup 
recirculation valve, and manually rolls the MFP with an individual pump governor 
control switch.  When the maximum output of the governor control switch has been 
reached and normal operating conditions for the pump have been attained, the 
individual pump=s speed controller is placed in automatic (slaved to the MFP master 
speed controller).  The operator then manually controls the pump =s speed with the 
master speed controller by maintaining a suitable ΔP between the feedwater and 
steam pressures.  The bypass valve FWIVs are opened, and the bypass valves are 
throttled open while the AFW flow control valves are throttled closed.  The steam 
generator water levels are maintained at the appropriate values at low powers 
through manual control of the bypass valves and the MFP master speed controller. 
 
When the plant reaches approximately 20% power, the MFP master speed 
controller is placed in automatic, and steam generator water level control is shifted 
from the bypass valves to the feedwater regulating valves.  The individual water 
level controllers are placed in automatic.  During the remainder of the power 
ascension, the second condensate pump and MFP are placed in service before 
power exceeds 70%, the first heater drain pump is placed in service at approxi-
mately 30% power, and the second heater drain pump is placed in service before 
power exceeds 90%.   
 
 
7.2.5 PRA Insights  
 
The purpose of the plant=s power conversion system is to convert the heat removed 
from the reactor core into electrical energy, which is provided to consumers by that 
plant=s utility.  Even though the plant=s Technical Specifications contain few 
provisions which apply to the main feedwater portion of the power conversion 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 7.2-16 Rev 0403 
system, there are some transients initiated by the loss of feedwater which can lead 
to core damage.  However, the associated sequences typically account for a very 
small fraction of the total core damage frequency (0.6% for Sequoyah and an 
insignificant percentage for Zion, Surry, and Trojan).  Modifications to the power 
conversion system would not contribute significantly to risk reduction or risk 
achievement values. 
 
 
7.2.6 Summary  
 
The main condenser is a multipressure, three-shell, surface condenser.  The 
condenser receives exhaust steam from the low pressure turbines, steam dumps, 
and the MFP turbines.  Condensate enters the condenser from the condensate 
pump recirculation lines, the MFP recirculation lines, the low pressure feedwater 
heater drains, and the CST (hotwell makeup).  The condensate pumps transfer the 
condensate from the main condenser through the demineralizers and low pressure 
heaters to the suction of the MFPs.  The MFPs take suction on the discharge from 
the condensate pumps and heater drain pumps and transfer feedwater through the 
high pressure heaters, feedwater regulating valves or bypass valves, and FWIVs to 
the steam generators.  The condensate and feedwater system supplies an 
automatically controlled flow of high pressure, preheated feedwater to maintain the 
desired steam generator water levels. 
 
The heater drain system improves plant efficiency by collecting the high temperature 
drainage from the MSRs and feedwater heaters and by transferring the drains back 
to the condensate and feedwater system. 
 
During plant operation the control of steam generator chemistry is accomplished by 
the purification of condensate, by the injection of chemicals into the condensate 
system to scavenge oxygen and to control pH, and by steam generator blowdown.  
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
