 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 3.2 
 
Reactor Coolant System
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-i Rev 1203 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
3.2 REACTOR COOLANT SYSTEM .................................................................... 3.2-1 
 
3.2.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... 3.2-2 
 
3.2.2 System Description .............................................................................. 3.2-2 
 
3.2.3 Component Descriptions ...................................................................... 3.2-3 
 
3.2.3.1 Reactor Cool ant Piping ........................................................... 3.2-3 
3.2.3.2 Instrum entation ....................................................................... 3.2-4 
3.2.3.3 Pressurizer.............................................................................. 3.2-6 
3.2.3.4 Steam Generators ................................................................ 3.2-12 
   3.2.3.5 Reactor Coolant Pump ......................................................... 3.2-16 
 
3.2.4 Leakage Dete ction ............................................................................. 3.2-23 
 
3.2.5 Vibration and Loose Pa rts Monitoring ................................................ 3.2-23 
 
3.2.6 System Interrelationships ................................................................... 3.2-24 
 
3.2.6.1 Materials of Construction ...................................................... 3.2-24 
3.2.6.2 Heatup and Cool down Limits ................................................ 3.2-25 
3.2.6.3 Natural Circulation ................................................................ 3.2-26 
 
3.2.7 PRA Insights ...................................................................................... 3.2-26 
 
3.2.7.1 Reactor Coolant  Pump Seals ............................................... 3.2-26 
3.2.7.2 Pressurizer Power-Operated Relief Valves .......................... 3.2-26 
 
3.2.8 Summary  ............................................................................................ 3.2-27 
 
 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
3.2-1 Reactor Coolant  Piping Design Parameters ............................................ 3.2-29 
3.2-2 Pressurizer Design Parameters ............................................................... 3.2-29 
3.2-3 Spray Control Valve Design Parameters ................................................. 3.2-29 
3.2-4 Code Safety Valve De sign Parameters ................................................... 3.2-30 
3.2-5 Pressurizer Power Operated Relief Valve Design Parameters ............... 3.2-30 
3.2-6 Pressurizer Relief Tank Design Parameters ........................................... 3.2-30 
3.2-7 Steam Generator Desi gn Parameters ..................................................... 3.2-31 
3.2-8 Reactor Coolant Pump Design Parameters ............................................ 3.2-31 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-ii Rev 1203 
3.2-9 Reactor Coolant Pump Motor Design Parameters .................................. 3.2-32 
3.2-10 Thermal and Loading Cycle Design Parameters .................................... 3.2-32 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
3.2-1  ................................................................... Reactor Coolant Loop Penetrations 
3.2-2  .................................................................................... Reactor Coolant System 
3.2-3  ................................................................................... Pressurizer Spray Scoop 
3.2-4  ................................................................................ Sample  Connection Scoop 
3.2-5  .............................................................................................. Hot Leg RTD Tap 
3.2-6  ............................................................................... Reactor C oolant Flow Taps 
3.2-7  ......................................................................................................... Pressurizer  
3.2-8  ................................................... Pressurizer Manway Cover and Spray Nozzle 
3.2-9  ............................................................................... Model 51 Steam Generator 
3.2-10  ............................................................................ Steam Generator Flow Paths 
3.2-11   ...................................................................................... Feed Ring Assemblies 
3.2-12  .................................................................... Feedring and Moisture Separators 
3.2-13  .............................................................. Steam Generator Moisture Separators 
3.2-14  ............................................................................................ Tube Support Plate 
3.2-15  ................................................................... Steam Generator Shrink and Swell 
3.2-16  ...................................................................................... Reactor Coolant Pump 
3.2-17  ...................................................................... Seal Water Injection and Leakoff 
3.2-18  .................................................................................... Shaft Seal Arrangement 
3.2-19  ............................................................................................ Seal Flow Diagram 
3.2-20  .........................................................................  Controlled Leakage Shaft Seal 
3.2-21  ...............................................RCP Flywheel and Anti-reverse Rotation Device 
3.2-22  ............................ Vibration and Loose Parts Monitoring Transducer Locations 
3.2-23  ................................................... Vibration and Loose Parts Monitoring System 
3.2-24  ............................. Vibration and Loose Parts Monitoring Cabinet Arrangement 
3.2-25  ................................ Vibration and Loose Parts Monitoring Indicator Assembly 
3.2-26  ................................................... RCS Pressure - Temperature Limits (Heatup) 
3.2-27  .............................................. RCS Pressure - Temperature Limits (Cooldown) 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-1 Rev 1203 
3.2  REACTOR COOLANT SYSTEM  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. State the purposes of the Reactor Coolant System (RCS). 
 
2. State the purposes of the following RCS penetrations: 
 
a. Hot Leg 
 
$ Pressurizer surge line 
$ Residual Heat Removal (RHR) suction 
$ Sample line 
$ RHR/Safety Injection (SI) recirculation 
 
b. Intermediate Leg 
 
$ Elbow flow taps 
$ Chemical and Volume Control System (CVCS) letdown 
$ Loop drain 
 
c. Cold Leg 
 
$ Pressurizer spray line 
$ CVCS charging 
$ Common injection penetration for RHR, SI, and an accumulator 
$ High head injection 
$ Excess letdown 
 
3. Describe the primary and secondary flow paths through the steam generator. 
 
4. State the purposes of the following components of the reactor coolant pump. 
 
a. Thermal barrier heat exchanger 
b. Seal package 
c. Flywheel 
d. Anti-reverse rotation device 
e. Number 1 seal bypass valve 
f. Number 1 seal leak off valve 
g. Seal stand-pipe 
 
5. Explain why seal injection flow is supplied to the reactor coolant pumps. 
 
6. State the purposes of the following: 
 
a. Pressurizer 
b. Code safety valves 
c. Power-operated relief valves (PORVs) 
d. PORV block valves 
e. Pressurizer relief tank (PRT) 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-2 Rev 1203 
f. Pressurizer spray valves 
g. Pressurizer heaters 
 
7. Describe the methods for determining pressurizer relief and safety valve position 
and/or leakage. 
 
8. Explain the following: 
 
a. Pressurizer spray driving force 
b. Purpose of pressurizer spray bypass 
 
9. Explain how failure of the following components could lead to core damage. 
 
a. Reactor coolant pump seals 
b. Power-operated relief valves 
 
 
3.2.1 Introduction  
 
The purposes of the RCS are: 
 
1. To transfer the heat produced in the reactor to the steam and power conversion 
systems. 
2. To provide a barrier to limit the escape of radioactivity to the containment. 
 
 
3.2.2 System Description  
 
The reactor coolant piping and components are generally referred to as the reactor 
coolant system, even though the RCS also includes the reactor vessel and the 
components directly attached to the reactor vessel.  The RCS consists of four 
similar heat transfer loops connected in parallel to the reactor vessel.  Each loop 
contains a steam generator, a reactor coolant pump, penetrations for connection 
with auxiliary and emergency systems, and appropriate instrumentation.  In addition, 
a pressurizer is connected by a surge line to one loop for pressure control.  A 
pressurizer relief tank is provided to collect any release from the pressurizer relief 
and code safety valves.  All RCS components are located inside the containment.  A 
typical RCS loop is shown on Figure 3.2-1. 
 
During normal operations, the RCS transfers the heat produced in the reactor to the 
steam generators where steam is produced to supply the turbine generator and 
other secondary system components.  Hot reactor coolant exits the reactor vessel 
and flows through the hot leg piping to the steam generator where energy is 
removed to make steam.  Coolant exits the steam generator and flows through the 
intermediate leg piping to the suction of the reactor coolant pump.  The pump 
discharge is directed through the cold leg piping to the reactor vessel inlet nozzles to 
complete the cycle.   
 
The RCS pressure boundary (described in section 3.0) acts as the second of the 
three barriers or Alines of defense@ against fission product release to the 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-3 Rev 1203 
environment.  The first and third barriers are the fuel cladding and the reactor 
containment building respectively.  Seismic restraints and supports are provided as 
required to ensure continued integrity of the RCS during seismic events.  All RCS 
components are designated Seismic Category 1. 
 
 
3.2.3 Component Descriptions  
 
3.2.3.1 Reactor Coolant Piping  
 
The reactor coolant piping and fittings are austenitic stainless steel.  The loop piping 
is sized to limit the maximum flow velocity for erosion or vibration considerations.  
The crossover line between the steam generator and reactor coolant pump is larger 
due to pump suction considerations.  
 
All smaller piping which is part of the RCS boundary, such as the pressurizer surge 
line, spray and relief line, loop drains and connecting lines to other systems are also 
austenitic stainless steel.  The nitrogen supply line for the pressurizer relief tank is 
carbon steel.  All joints and connections are welded, except for the piping associated 
with the pressurizer relief and code safety valves, where flanged joints are used.  
 
Penetrations (Figures 3.2-1 and 3.2-2) which are common to all reactor coolant 
loops include the following:  
 
1. Hot leg injection/recirculation from the Emergency Core Cooling Systems 
(ECCSs), 
2. Hot leg wide-range, well-mounted, RTD, 
3. Elbow flow detector high and low pressure taps (intermediate leg), 
4. Drain connection to the reactor coolant drain tank (RCDT), 
5. Cold leg wide-range, well-mounted RTD, 
6. Cold leg injection from the ECCS safety injection pumps, residual heat removal 
pumps and the accumulators, 
7. Cold leg injection from ECCS boron injection tank (high head injection), and 
8. Hot and cold leg taps for the RTD bypass manifolds. 
 
Additional penetrations specific to individual loops and their typical locations are as 
follows:  
 
1. Pressurizer surge line from loop 2 hot leg, 
2. Supply to the RHR System from loop 4 hot legs, 
3. CVCS letdown from loop 3 crossover leg, 
4. CVCS charging to loops 1 and 4 cold legs, 
5. Pressurizer spray from loops 2 and 3 cold legs, 
6. Excess letdown to CVCS from loop 3 cold leg, and 
7. Sample line from loop 1 and 3 hot legs. 
 
Thermal sleeves are installed at points in the system where high thermal stresses 
could develop due to rapid changes in fluid temperature during normal operational 
transients.  These points include: 
  
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-4 Rev 1203 
1. Charging connections from the CVCS, 
2. Pressurizer end of the surge line, and 
3. Pressurizer spray line connection to the pressurizer. 
 
Piping connections from process systems are made above the horizontal center line 
of the reactor coolant piping, with the exception of:  
 
1. RHR suction, which is 45 E down from the horizontal centerline.  This enables the 
water level in the RCS to be lower in the reactor coolant pipe while continuing to 
operate the RHR system, should this be required for maintenance. 
 
2. Loop drain lines and the connection for temporary level measurement of water in 
the RCS during refueling and maintenance operation. 
 
3. The differential pressure taps for flow measurement, which are downstream of 
the steam generators on the 90E elbow. 
 
The following penetrations extend into the coolant flowpath: 
 
1. The spray line inlet connections which extend into the cold leg piping in the form 
of a scoop so that the velocity head of the reactor coolant loop flow adds to the 
spray driving force (Figure 3.2-3). 
 
2. The reactor coolant sample system taps are inserted into the main stream to 
obtain a representative sample of the reactor coolant (Figure 3.2-4). 
 
3. The RTD hot leg taps which extend into the reactor coolant are used to obtain a 
representative temperature sample from each hot leg (Figure 3.2-5). 
 
4. The wide range temperature detectors are located in RTD wells that extend into 
the reactor coolant pipes. 
 
All valves in the RCS which are in contact with the coolant are constructed primarily 
of stainless steel.  Other materials in contact with the coolant are manufactured of 
special materials that are noncorrosive. 
 
All RCS valves which are three inches or larger,  and that will normally be operated 
at a temperature above 212EF, are provided with double-packed stuffing boxes with 
stem lantern gland leak off connections.  All throttling control valves, regardless of 
size, are provided with double-packed stuffing boxes and stem leak off connections. 
All leak-off connections are piped to the PRT.  Leakage to the containment is 
essentially zero for these valves. 
 
3.2.3.2 Instrumentation 
 
RCS Temperature 
 
There are two ranges of RCS temperature monitors.  Both ranges use RTDs.  The 
temperatures of the hot leg and of the cold leg of each loop are monitored for 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-5 Rev 1203 
indication only by wide-range (0-700EF) detectors.  These detectors are mounted in 
wells which penetrate the coolant piping and are part of the pressure boundary.  
These RTDs do not come in contact with the reactor coolant.  Separate bypass 
manifolds for each RCS hot leg and cold leg provide individual narrow range 
temperature signals.      
 
The narrow-range T
h and Tc temperature detectors are used for reactor control and 
protection and are mounted in individual bypass manifolds around each steam 
generator.  The narrow-range (530EF-650EF) T
h RTDs obtain a representative 
sample of the hot leg temperature by mixing the flow from three hot leg taps which 
extend into the flow stream 120 degrees apart.  The narrow-range (510 EF - 630EF) 
Tc RTDs are also mounted in the bypass manifolds and have one tap directly 
downstream of each reactor coolant pump.  Only one connection per cold leg is 
required to get a representative temperature indication due to the mixing of the 
reactor coolant caused by the reactor coolant pump.      
 
The information derived from these hot and cold leg RTDs (T
avg and ΔT), from all 
four loops, is indicated in the control room.  Additional information about these 
temperature indicators may be found in Chapter 10.0, Primary Systems Control and 
Instrumentation..  
 
RCS Flow  
 
Elbow taps are used in the RCS to indicate the status of the reactor coolant flow 
(Figure 3.2-6).  The function of this device is to provide information as to whether or 
not a reduction in flow has occurred.  An advantage of this type of flow detection 
system is that no components need to be inserted into the coolant flowpath.  
Components in the flowpath produce pressure drops and either reduce flow or 
require increased pumping power.  The elbow flow instrument measures the 
differential pressure between the inner and outer radius of the intermediate leg 
piping elbow.  The outer radius will experience a slightly higher pressure due to the 
dynamic effects of coolant flow.  
 
The correlation between changes in flow and elbow tap indication has been well 
established and is described by the following equation: 
 
2
0
2
0P
P
ω
ω=Δ
Δ  
 
 where: 
 
ΔP is the differential pressure corresponding to present measured flow rate ω.  
ΔP
0 is the differential pressure corresponding to initial reference flow rate ω0. 
 
The full-flow reference point ΔP0 is established during initial plant startup.  The low-
flow reactor trip setpoint is then established by extrapolating data from a curve 
which correlates ΔP0 to flow.  This technique has been well established in providing 
core protection against low coolant flow in Westinghouse PWR plants.  The 
expected absolute accuracy of the channel is within 
± 10% and field results have 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-6 Rev 1203 
shown the repeatability of the trip point to be within ± 1%.  The accident analysis for 
a loss-of-flow transient assumes a instrumentation error of ± 3%.  
 
Pressurizer Pressure  
 
Redundant pressure detectors are provided to monitor the pressure in the steam 
space of the pressurizer.  Information from these detectors is used for indication, 
control, and protection.  For additional information see Chapter 10.0, Primary 
Systems Control and Instrumentation. 
 
Pressurizer Level  
 
Redundant level instrumentation is provided to monitor the water level in the 
pressurizer.  Differential pressure detectors monitor the difference between the 
height of a known column of water (reference leg) and the height of the water in the 
pressurizer.   
 
This instrumentation is used for indication, control, and protection.  A separate 
channel calibrated for cold plant conditions is provided for shutdown, startup and 
refueling operations.  Additional information may be found in Chapter 10.0, Primary 
Systems Control and Instrumentation.  
  
Safety and Relief Valve Monitors  
 
Temperature detectors and acoustic monitors on the discharge piping from the 
pressurizer relief and safety valves indicate leakage or opening of these valves.  
Each power-operated relief valve also has a stem-mounted position switch with 
indication in the control room. 
 
Loop Pressure  
 
Three pressure detectors are installed at the hot leg suction of the residual heat 
removal system.  These instruments are wide range transmitters (0-3000 psig) 
which provide pressure indication over the full operating range.  
 
One of the three pressure transmitters provides indication to the remote shutdown 
station only.  The remaining two pressure transmitters provide indication in the main 
control room, a PORV actuation signal in conjunction with the low temperature over 
pressure mitigation system, the permissive signals for the RHR loop isolation valves 
interlock circuits to protect the low pressure piping of the RHR system and input to 
the subcooled margin monitor. 
 
Two local pressure indicators are also provided for operator reference during 
shutdown conditions.  One taps into the loop 3 sample line, and the other senses 
the pressure in the loop-4-to-RHR suction line.  
 
3.2.3.3 Pressurizer  
 
The pressurizer is a vertical, cylindrical vessel with hemispherical top and bottom 
heads, constructed of manganese-molybdenum alloy steel, and clad with austenitic 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-7 Rev 1203 
stainless steel on all surfaces exposed to reactor coolant water.  Electrical heaters 
(78) are installed through the bottom head of the vessel, while the spray nozzle, 
relief, and safety valve connections are located in the top of the vessel. 
 
The pressurizer has four basic functions: 
 
1. Pressurizing the RCS during plant heatup, 
2. Maintaining normal RCS pressure during steady state operations, 
3. Limiting pressure changes during RCS transients to within allowable values and, 
4. Preventing the reactor coolant system pressure from exceeding its design 
pressure value of 2500 psig.  
 
During normal operations, the pressurizer is maintained at saturation conditions by 
electrical heaters (Figure 3.2-7).  Under saturation conditions, each temperature has 
a corresponding saturation pressure.  At nominal full power conditions, 
approximately 60 percent of the pressurizer volume is saturated water, with the 
remaining 40 percent saturated steam. 
 
The pressurizer is connected to a loop hot leg by the surge line.  Since the RCS 
(except for the pressurizer) is a hydraulically solid system, the pressure in the 
pressurizer will be maintained throughout the system.  Design parameters for the 
pressurizer are listed in Table 3.2-2. 
 
If the RCS were operated completely full of water any change in temperature of the 
reactor coolant would produce unacceptably large changes in pressure due to the 
density change of the coolant.  Therefore, the pressurizer is attached to the reactor 
coolant system to provide a surge and makeup volume to accommodate these 
density changes.   
 
To understand how the pressurizer maintains RCS pressure, consider the 
volumetric difference between water and steam.  At normal system operating 
temperatures, water is approximately six times as dense as steam.  Therefore, as 
the water is heated by the pressurizer electrical heaters to produce steam, a factor 
of six volume change occurs.  For example, boiling one cubic foot of water would 
produce six cubic feet of steam.  Since the volume in the pressurizer which is 
available for steam is fixed by the pressurizer level control system, the density of 
steam must increase.  This increase in density produces a pressure increase in the 
RCS.  Conversely if steam is condensed, a factor of six density reduction occurs, 
which results in a reduction in pressure.  The steam inside the pressurizer responds 
in a manner similar to an ideal gas (pressure is proportional to density).   
 
During steady-state operations a small number of heaters are energized to make up 
for ambient heat losses.  The small amount of subcooled liquid which is 
continuously circulated from the RCS via the spray line bypass valves promotes 
mixing and aids in chemistry control.   
 
Many transients affecting pressure are caused by changes in the reactor coolant 
temperature. Temperature changes produces changes in coolant density, which 
force water into (insurge) or out of (outsurge) the pressurizer.   
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-8 Rev 1203 
In the case of an increase in RCS temperature, the expansion of the coolant 
produces an insurge into the pressurizer.  This insurge compresses the steam 
Abubble,@ resulting in an increase in steam density and a corresponding increase in 
pressure.  If the pressure increases by a predetermined amount, the pressurizer 
pressure control system modulates the spray valves to admit relatively cool water to 
the steam space to condense some steam.  This reduces the density of the steam 
and limits the pressure increase.  
 
If the RCS temperature decreases, the contraction of the coolant produces an 
outsurge from the pressurizer.  This is accommodated by an expansion of the steam 
bubble and a corresponding decrease in steam density and pressure.   As the 
pressure decreases, some of the saturated water in the pressurizer will flash to 
steam to help maintain system pressure.  If pressure decreases to a predetermined 
value, the pressurizer pressure control system will energize additional electrical 
heaters to boil more water and return pressure to normal.  
 
If the RCS pressure increases towards the design limit, power-operated relief and 
self-actuating code safety valves open.  These valves release steam from the steam 
space of the pressurizer and thereby limit the overpressure condition.    
 
The volume of the pressurizer (1800 ft
3) is greater than, or equal to, the minimum 
volume of steam and water combination which satisfies all of the following 
requirements: 
 
1. The combined saturated water volume and steam expansion volume is sufficient 
to provide the desired pressure response to programmed system volume 
changes. 
 
2. The water volume is sufficient to prevent the heaters from being uncovered 
during a step load increase of ten percent of full power.   
 
3. The steam volume is large enough to accommodate the insurge resulting from a 
50 percent reduction of full load with automatic rod control and full steam dump 
capacity without the water level reaching the high level reactor trip set point. 
 
4. The pressurizer does not empty following a reactor trip with a turbine trip. 
 
5. The steam volume is large enough to prevent water relief through the safety 
valves following a loss of load with the high pressurizer water level initiating a 
reactor trip. 
 
6. A safety injection signal will not be ac tivated following a reactor trip and turbine 
trip. 
 
Pressurizer Heaters 
 
The electrical heaters installed in the pressurizer are replaceable, direct-immersion, 
tubular-sheath type heaters with hermetically sealed terminals.  They are located in 
the lower portion of the pressurizer vessel and maintain the steam and water 
contents at equilibrium conditions.  There are 78 heaters installed for a total capacity 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-9 Rev 1203 
of 1794 kW.  The heaters are broken down into two groups, the proportional heater 
group consists of 18 heaters for an output of 414 kW and the backup heater group 
consists of 60 heaters for an output of 1380 kW.  The heaters are capable of raising 
the temperature of the pressurizer and its contents at approximately 55 EF/hr. 
 
The hermetically sealed terminals connected to the external pressurizer vessel wall 
are capable of retaining full system pressure should the immersed tubular heater 
sheath fail.  Ventilation of the heater connections is accomplished through holes 
drilled in the pressurizer support skirt. 
 
Pressurizer Spray 
 
Spray water is injected into the steam volume of the pressurizer through a spray 
nozzle located in the top of the vessel (Figure 3.2-8).  Automatically controlled, air-
operated valves with remote manual overrides are used to control pressurizer spray 
from two loop cold legs.  In parallel with each spray valve is a manual throttle valve 
which permits a small continuous flow to bypass the spray valves.  This small flow 
(one gpm) is provided to reduce the thermal stresses and/or  thermal shock to the 
pressurizer spray penetration and spray nozzle inside the pressurizer when the 
spray valves open.  In addition, this flow helps maintain uniform water chemistry in 
the pressurizer to that of the reactor coolant system.  Design parameters for the 
spray valves are listed in Table 3.2-3. 
 
Temperature sensors with low temperature alarms are provided in each spray line to 
alert the operator of insufficient bypass flow.  The layout of the spray line piping to 
the pressurizer forms a water seal which prevents steam buildup back to the spray 
valves.  The maximum spray flow rate (840 gpm) is selected to prevent the pressure 
in the pressurizer from reaching the operating set point of the PORVs, following a 10 
percent step decrease in power. 
   
The pressurizer spray lines and valves are sized and located to provide adequate 
spray using the differential pressure between the surge line connection in the hot leg 
and the spray line connection in the cold leg as the driving force.  The spray line 
inlet connections (Figure 3.2-3) extend into the cold leg piping in the form of a scoop 
so that the velocity head of the reactor coolant loop flow adds to the spray driving 
force.  The spray valves and spray line connections are redundant so that the spray 
flow can be admitted to the steam space of the pressurizer even when one of the 
associated RCP's is not operating.  In addition to their pressure control function, the 
sprays may be manually operated to circulate coolant from the loop to the 
pressurizer for boron concentration equalization.   
 
A flow path from the CVCS to the pressurizer spray line is also provided.  This 
connection provides auxiliary spray to the vapor space of the pressurizer during cool 
down if the reactor coolant pumps are not operating.  The thermal sleeve on the 
pressurizer spray connection is designed to withstand the thermal stresses resulting 
from the introduction of this relatively cold auxiliary spray water.  
 
 
  
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-10 Rev 1203 
Surge Line 
 
The surge line connects the bottom of the pressurizer to one of the reactor coolant 
system hot legs.  It is sized to limit the pressure drop between the pressurizer and 
the RCS during the maximum anticipated insurge.  It is designed in this fashion to 
ensure that the highest pressure point in the RCS does not exceed the design 
pressure with the code safety valves discharging at their maximum allowable 
accumulation.  The surge line also contains a thermal sleeve at the pressurizer end 
which is designed to withstand the thermal stresses resulting from surges of 
relatively hotter or colder water which will occur when the temperature of the RCS 
changes.  
 
A temperature sensor with remote indication and a low temperature alarm is 
provided on the surge line.  This indication along with the spray line temperature 
indication monitors performance of the continuous spray bypass flow. 
   
Code Safety Valves 
 
The three pressurizer code safety valves are totally enclosed pop-open-type valves. 
The valves are spring loaded, and self actuating, and they have backpressure 
compensation designed to prevent the reactor coolant system pressure from 
exceeding the design pressure by more than 10 percent.  This meets the 
requirements of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Code, Section III.  The set pressure 
of the safety valves is 2485 psig.  Design parameters for the pressurizer code safety 
valves are listed in Table 3.2-4. 
 
A water seal is maintained below each code safety valve seat to minimize leakage.  
The 6-in. pipes connecting the pressurizer nozzles to their respective code safety 
valves are shaped in the form of a loop seal.  Condensate, as a result of normal 
heat losses to ambient, accumulates in the loop and floods the valve seat.  This 
water seal prevents leakage of steam or hydrogen gas to pass by the safety valve 
seats.  If the pressure inside the pressurizer exceeds the set point of the code safety 
valves, they will lift and the water from the loop seal will discharge during the 
accumulation period.  
 
Due to the high pipe and pipe support loads caused by these Awater slugs,@ catch 
pots were designed and placed immediately downstream of the relief and safety 
valves.  A total of four of these slug diversion devices (SDDs) are installed (one for 
each of the code safeties and one for the PORV combined discharge).  The SDDs 
are located at the change in pipe direction so that the water slugs flow into the 
devices and are trapped.  These devices are totally passive and ensure that the 
piping system is not subjected to stresses or loads beyond code allowable.  
 
A temperature indicator in the safety valve discharge manifold alerts the operator to 
the passage of steam due to leakage or valves lifting.  Acoustic monitors are also 
provided for each valve to provide a positive indication of leakage or code safety 
valve operation.  
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-11 Rev 1203 
Power-Operated Relief Valves 
 
The pressurizer is normally equipped with two PORVs, which limit pressure in the 
reactor coolant system and minimize the probability of actuation of the high-pressure 
reactor trip.  The operation of the PORVs also limits the operation of the fixed high-
pressure code safety valves.  The PORVs are air operated and can be opened or 
closed automatically or by remote manual control.  Should the air supply to the 
PORVs fail, a backup air supply system is provided to maintain the PORVs operable 
for 10 minutes following a loss of instrument air.  Remotely operated block valves 
are provided to isolate the PORVs if excessive leakage occurs.  Design parameters 
for the power-operated relief valves are listed in Table 3.2-5.   
 
The PORVs are designed to limit the pressure in the pressurizer to a value below 
the high pressure reactor trip setpoint for design transients up to and including a 50-
percent step load decrease with full steam dump actuation.  An acoustic monitor can 
be installed at the outlet of each PORV to detect leakage and/or valve opening. 
 
The PORVs, with additional actuation logic, are also utilized to mitigate potential 
RCS cold over pressurization transients during cold shutdown conditions. 
 
Pressurizer Relief Tank 
 
The PRT collects, condenses and cools the steam discharged from the pressurizer 
code safety and power-operated relief valves.  The tank is maintained approximately 
three quarters full of water with a nitrogen cover gas.  Steam is discharged through 
a sparger at the bottom of the tank below the water level.  This condenses and cools 
the steam by mixing it with water that is near containment ambient temperature.  
Discharge from a number of smaller relief valves located in systems inside or 
outside of the containment are also piped to the pressurizer relief tank.   
 
The design of the PRT is based on the requirement to condense and cool a 
discharge of pressurizer steam equal to 110 percent of the volume above the zero 
power pressurizer water level set point (25%).  This tank is not designed to accept a 
continuous discharge from the pressurizer.  The volume of water in the PRT is 
capable of absorbing the heat from the assumed discharge from the pressurizer 
code safety valves, with an initial water temperature of 120°F and increasing to a 
final temperature of 200°F.  If the temperature inside the PRT rises above 114°F 
during plant operation, the tank is cooled by spraying in cool primary makeup water 
and draining the warm mixture to the reactor coolant drain tank.  Design parameters 
for the pressurizer relief tank are listed in Table 3.2-6.  The spray rate inside the 
PRT is designed to cool the tank from 200°F to 120°F in approximately one hour 
following the design discharge of pressurizer steam.  The nitrogen gas overpressure 
inside this tank is selected to limit the maximum pressure following a design 
discharge to 50 psig.    
 
The PRT is constructed of austenitic stainless steel.  A flanged nozzle is provided 
for connection of the pressurizer relief and safety valve discharge line.  The 
discharge piping and the sparger are constructed of austenitic stainless steel.  A 
vacuum breaker hole is located on the discharge line inside the PRT which will allow 
the PRT and the discharge line pressure to equalize, preventing water in the PRT 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-12 Rev 1203 
from being forced up into the discharge line.  Two rupture discs are provided to 
prevent exceeding the design pressure of the PRT.  The rupture discs have a relief 
capacity equal to the combined capacity of all three pressurizer safety valves.  The 
design pressure of the PRT (and the rupture discs setting) is twice the calculated 
pressure produced by the design relief volume described above.  This margin is 
provided to prevent deformation of the rupture disc.  
 
The PRT and its connections are designed to operate under a vacuum to prevent 
the collapse of the tank if the contents are cooled following a discharge without 
adding additional cover gas.  Piping penetrations are provided so that the cover gas 
may be sampled and analyzed for hydrogen and oxygen.  A vent to the gaseous 
waste disposal system allows venting of excess pressure or removal of any non-
condensable or fission product gases which might be transferred from the 
pressurizer to the relief tank.  A nitrogen supply connection allows initial supply and 
makeup of the cover gas.   
 
3.2.3.4 Steam Generators  
 
The steam generators are vertical shell-and-U-tube heat exchangers in which 
energy from the hot pressurized reactor coolant is transferred to the secondary 
coolant to produce dry, saturated steam.  The steam generator provides the 
boundary between the radioactive primary system and the non-radioactive 
secondary system.  
 
Each steam generator is fitted with a ring on the inside of the hot and cold leg 
nozzles for the fitting of a nozzle dam.  These nozzle dams are fitted robotically and 
allow RCS level to be raised to refueling levels while the steam generator primary 
side is drained.  This allows more flexibility in scheduling the time consuming steam 
generator tube inspections.  In addition it reduces the time where the RCS must be 
operated in a reduced inventory status with RCS water level at the loop mid point. 
 
A cutaway diagram showing the construction of a Westinghouse model 51 steam 
generator may be found on Figure 3.2-9 and will be used for explanation purposes.  
The design data for the steam generators are listed in Table 3.2-7. 
 
The steam generator is designed to produce saturated steam with less than 0.25% 
percent moisture by weight under the following conditions:  
 
1. Steady-state operation at up to 100% of full load steam flow, assuming that the 
water level in the steam generator is at program, 
2. Ramp load changes at a maximum rate of 5% per minute in the range from 15 to 
100% full power steam flow, and 
3. Step load changes of 10% of full power between 15 and 100% full power steam 
flow. 
 
The steam generator is constructed of carbon steel, with all surfaces in contact with 
reactor coolant made from or clad with appropriate corrosion resistant material.  
Construction and operation of both the primary (reactor coolant) and secondary 
(steam) sides of the steam generator are described in the following paragraphs.  
Primary and secondary flow paths are shown on Figure 3.2-10.   
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-13 Rev 1203 
Primary (Reactor Coolant) Side 
 
Reactor coolant enters and leaves the steam generator through nozzles in the 
bottom hemispherical head.  The head is divided into inlet and outlet chambers by a 
vertical partition (divider) plate which extends from the bottom of the tubesheet to 
the bottom hemispherical head.  Bolted, gasketed manways are provided for access 
to both the inlet and outlet sides of the bottom hemispherical head.   
 
The tubesheet and the heat transfer tubes form the boundary between the primary 
and secondary systems.  The tubes and the divider plate are manufactured of 
Inconel.  The primary side of the tubesheet is clad with Inconel while the interior 
surfaces of the hemispherical head and the nozzles are clad with austenitic stainless 
steel.  After the tube ends are seal welded to the tube sheet, they are roller 
expanded for the full depth of the tubesheet cladding.  This is done to prevent the 
leakage of the high pressure reactor coolant from the primary side to the lower 
pressure secondary side. 
 
Secondary (Steam) Side 
 
The secondary side of the steam generator consists of the feed and steam nozzles, 
the tube bundle and supports, the tube bundle wrapper, primary and secondary 
moisture separators, appropriate instrumentation and blow down penetrations.  The 
steam generator shell and its internals are constructed of carbon steel. 
 
At 100% thermal power feedwater at a temperature of approximately 430 EF enters 
the steam generator through the feedwater inlet nozzle.  As the feedwater leaves 
the feed ring it is distributed to the annulus between the tube bundle wrapper and 
the steam generator shell where it mixes with the hot recirculation water from the 
moisture separation equipment.  This annulus is called the downcomer and is where 
steam generator level is measured for indication, control and protection.  The feed 
water is distributed through an upper feed ring (Figure 3.2-11) into the annulus. 
   
The feedwater-recirculation flow mixture then flows between the bottom of the tube 
wrapper (shroud) and the tubesheet into the tube bundle region.  In the tube bundle 
region, heat is transferred to the secondary coolant producing a steam-water 
mixture.  This mixture flows upward to the primary or swirl-vane moisture separators 
(Figure 3.2-12).  These separators consist of a number of stationary vanes which 
impart a swirling motion to the steam water mixture.  The steam, being less dense 
than the water can change direction easily and passes through the swirl vanes.  The 
water is slung to the outside and flows to the downcomer where it mixes with 
incoming feedwater.  The water in the downcomer is maintained at a level that is 
equal to a height in the boiling section of the steam generator that is approximately 
at the bottom of the swirl vanes. 
 
Although the swirl vanes remove most of the moisture from the steam, a second 
stage of moisture separation is necessary to meet design requirements.  The steam 
passes through chevron separators (Figure 3.2-13) and then leaves the generator 
through the outlet nozzle.  These chevron separators force the steam to take a 
torturous path.  Again the steam can change directions easily as it passes through 
while the more dense water cannot.  The separated moisture is collected and 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-14 Rev 1203 
drained to the downcomer.  Steam exiting the steam generator has a minimum 
quality of 99.75% (less than 0.25% moisture).   
 
The steam generator operates as a natural circulation boiler.  The flow from the 
downcomer to the tube bundle is caused by the difference in density between the 
slightly subcooled liquid in the downcomer and the steam-water mixture in the tube 
bundle.  At full power, the flow in the downcomer is three (3) to five (5) times that of 
the incoming feedwater.  This is caused by the recirculation flow from the moisture 
separators and is necessary to ensure proper thermal-hydraulic performance of the 
steam generator.  The higher flow velocities also help prevent the collection of 
impurities at the tube to tube sheet area of the steam generator.    
 
In order to support and align the steam generator tubes and prevent flow induced 
movement, tube support plates are provided (See Figure 3.2-14).  Some steam 
generators have support plates with drilled holes; each tube passes through a hole 
which is slightly larger than the diameter of the tube.  Additional flow holes are 
drilled to provide passage for steam flow.  During cold plant conditions, the gap 
between the tube and support plate increases due to differential expansion.  
Corrosion products deposit in the holes in the support plate.  When the steam 
generator is heated, differential expansion closes the gaps.  Since the holes are 
now smaller due to the corrosion products, tubes can actually be dented, and tube 
integrity can be affected. This phenomenon is known as tube denting. 
 
To help maintain the steam generator relatively free of dissolved solids and remove 
corrosion products which tend to concentrate at the tubesheet, a penetration is 
provided to drain a portion of the steam generator water for processing.  This drain 
is called steam generator blowdown.  It removes water from just above the 
tubesheet and diverts it to the steam generator blow down system.  This path is 
monitored for radiation which would indicate a steam generator primary to 
secondary leak.  Steam generator blowdown is in service continuously during plant 
operations.   
 
Steam Generator Level Instrumentation 
 
There are two types of steam generator level indication: wide range and narrow 
range.  Both indicators measure the water level in the downcomer.  The wide-range 
level instrument (one per steam generator) provides indication only, and monitors 
the level from the top of the tube sheet to a height of approximately 48 feet.   
 
The narrow-range level instruments monitor the upper 12 feet of the wide-range 
span.  Therefore, if the water level is at the bottom of the narrow-range span, the 
narrow-range instrument indicates 0% level, and the wide-range instrument should 
indicate approximately 75% level.  The narrow-range indicators are used for 
indication, control, and protection. 
 
There are three narrow-range channels; each provides indication in the control 
room.  The steam generator water level control system utilizes a dedicated level 
channel in the automatic feed water control system.  For protection, a two-out-of-
three logic provides a low-low steam generator level reactor trip for loss of heat sink 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-15 Rev 1203 
protection, and a high-high steam generator level turbine trip to protect the turbine 
against excessive moisture carryover. 
 
Steam Generator Operational Characteristics 
 
It is a characteristic of U-tube steam generators that steam pressure decreases with 
increasing load or steam flow.  The rate of heat transfer across the tubes is 
approximated by the following equation:   
 
Q
•
= UAΔT 
 
 where: 
 Q
•
 =  Rate of heat transfer (typically expressed in BTU/hr) 
 U =  Heat transfer coefficient 
 A =  Total heat transfer area 
 ΔT =  Temperature difference across the tubes, which is approximately equal to 
the average temperature of the reactor coolant (T
avg) minus the saturation 
temperature of the steam (Tsat) inside the steam generator 
 
The rate of heat transfer ( Q
•
) is determined by the plant load.  The heat transfer 
coefficient (U) can be assumed to be constant, since it is a function of the materials 
of construction.  The heat transfer surface (A) is also a constant, given that the 
tubes remain covered at all power levels.  Therefore, in order to transfer more 
energy across the tubes, the ΔT must increase.  It would be desirable to accomplish 
this increase in ΔT by raising T
avg, but reactor thermal limits preclude raising Tavg to 
the extent necessary.  Therefore, Tavg is increased by the rod control system to gain 
part of the required ΔT increase, but the additional increase in ΔT must come from a 
reduction in Tsat.  As Tsat decreases, steam pressure also decreases because the 
steam generator operates as a saturated system.  Steam pressure decreases 
approximately 150 psi from no load to full load.   
 
As the secondary load is increased, the number and size of the steam bubbles in 
the steam generator increase.  This reduces the density and increases the specific 
volume of the mass in the steam generator.  If mass were held constant, steam 
generator level would increase unacceptably.  The steam generator water level 
control system maintains a programmed level during power operation (see Chapter 
11.1).   
 
In order to maintain level constant with increasing load, the mass in the generator 
must decrease.  Due to this reduction in mass at high power, a plant trip produces a 
large reduction in level as the steam bubbles collapse and the specific volume of the 
steam generator secondary fluid decreases.  As described above, it should be 
understood that there is more mass of secondary coolant in the steam generator at 
no load than at full power.  Therefore, no load is the worst case for steam line break 
analyses. 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-16 Rev 1203 
Shrink and Swell 
 
Characteristic of a U-tube steam generator are the phenomena of Ashrink@ and 
Aswell.@  Referring to Figure 3.2-15, at time 0
1 steam flow is decreased.  This results 
in a rapid increase in steam pressure.  This causes the steam bubbles in the tube 
bundle region to collapse and the saturation conditions to change.  The boiling rate 
in this region decreases because of the pressure increase.  Both effects result in the 
inability of the mass in the tube bundle region to hold up the level in the downcomer, 
and a drop in the measured level occurs.  The continued heat input from the primary 
and the drop in heat removal from the generator combine to raise the temperature in 
the generator to a new saturation condition and boiling increases.  The increase in 
bubble formation results in the ability of the mass in the tube bundle region to hold 
up the level in the downcomer and level starts to return to setpoint.  The response of 
the feed water system causes level to oscillate, but eventually returns to setpoint. 
 
With an increase in steam flow at time 0
2, and the resultant decrease in steam 
pressure, the opposite effect, swell, will occur.  Again the saturation conditions in the 
generator are affected.  The more rapid the change in steam flow, the more 
pronounced will be the effect of shrink or swell on generator level. 
 
At low power levels, a similar effect is produced by rapid changes in feed flow.  The 
heat input rate from the primary is low compared to that at high power levels.  This 
limits the ability of the steam generator to compensate for rapid changes on the 
secondary side.  For example, a rapid increase in feed water flow will put more 
relatively cold water in the steam generator than the primary can heat up in a short 
time period.  This results in a drop in the temperature of the steam generator and a 
reduction of the boiling rate in the tube bundle region.  Again the ability of the mass 
in the tube bundle region to hold up the level in the downcomer is affected and 
measured level drops.   
 
As the water is heated and boiling begins to occur, there is an expansion of the 
additional mass in the steam generator, and the water level in the downcomer will 
rise to some higher value. 
 
3.2.3.5 Reactor Coolant Pump  
 
The reactor coolant pumps provide forced-circulation flow through the core sufficient 
to ensure adequate heat transfer to maintain a departure from nucleate boiling ratio 
(DNBR) of greater than 1.3.  The required net positive suction head (NPSH) for the 
reactor coolant pumps is always less than that available by system design and 
operating limits.  Design parameters for the reactor coolant pumps are listed in 
Table 3.2-8. 
   
To ensure adequate core cooling after a loss of electrical power to the RCPs, each 
pump is designed with a flywheel that is attached to the top of the pump motor.  If 
the reactor trips on a loss of flow due to a loss of power to the reactor coolant 
pumps, the flywheels will extend the coast-down time to maintain adequate heat 
transfer capability and help establish natural circulation flow.  Power to the reactor 
coolant pump motors is from the nonvital station service power and cannot be 
supplied from the emergency diesel generators.  The RCPs are capable of 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-17 Rev 1203 
operation without mechanical damage at speeds of up to 125% of normal speed.  
Periodic surveillances are performed on the flywheel to ensure its integrity.   
 
The reactor coolant pump is a vertical, single-stage, centrifugal pump designed to 
pump large volumes of reactor coolant at high temperatures and pressures.  A 
cutaway of a typical reactor coolant pump is shown on Figure 3.2-16.  The pump 
consists of three sections from bottom to top:  
 
1. The hydraulic section consists of the inlet and outlet nozzles, casing, flange, 
impeller, diffuser, pump shaft, pump bearing, thermal barrier and thermal barrier 
heat exchanger. 
 
2. The shaft seal section consists of the number one controlled leakage seal and 
the numbers two and three rubbing face seals.  These seals are located within 
the main flange and seal housing. 
 
3. The motor section consists of a vertical, squirrel cage, induction motor with an oil 
lubricated double Kingsbury thrust bearing, two oil-lubricated radial bearings, and 
a flywheel with an antireverse rotation device and appropriate support 
equipment.   
 
Hydraulic Section 
 
Casing - The pump casing contains and supports the hydraulic section of the pump 
and is part of the reactor coolant pressure boundary.  The casing is a 304 stainless 
steel casting whose nozzles are welded to the RCS piping.  The entire weight of the 
pump and motor is supported by pads attached to the casing.  This support system 
is designed to allow for thermal expansion of the RCS.   
 
Impeller - The impeller is designed to impart energy to the reactor coolant.  This 
energy is added in the form of kinetic energy (velocity head).  The impeller is a 
stainless steel casting which is shrunk and keyed to the lower end of the pump 
shaft.  An impeller nut is then threaded and locked to the shaft.  The impeller is 
designed for counter clockwise rotation as viewed from the top of the pump.   
 
Diffuser and Turning Vanes - The diffuser, which is located above the impeller, 
converts the velocity head generated by the impeller to a static head by reducing the 
fluid velocity in the expanding flow channels between the diffuser vanes.  The flow is 
then directed to the outlet nozzle by the turning vanes.  The diffuser and turning 
vanes are constructed of stainless steel.   
 
Radial Bearing Assembly - The pump bearing is a self-aligning, spherical, 
graphitar-coated, journal bearing.  The bearing provides radial support and 
alignment for the pump shaft and is water cooled and lubricated.  It is essential that 
the water circulating through the bearing be kept cool.  High temperatures will 
damage the graphitar coating and cause bearing failure.  This cool water is normally 
supplied by seal injection from the CVCS as described in Chapter 4.0.   
 
Thermal Barrier and Heat Exchanger - The thermal barrier assembly consists of 
the thermal barrier and thermal barrier heat exchanger.  The thermal barrier is 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-18 Rev 1203 
designed to reduce the rate of heat transfer from the hot reactor coolant to the pump 
radial bearing and thermal barrier heat exchanger.  It consists of a number of 
concentric stainless steel cylinders extending vertically from the top of the impeller 
to the thermal barrier flange, and a number of stacked horizontal plates at the 
flange.  The barrier to heat transfer is provided by the gap between the cylinders 
and plates.  The thermal barrier heat exchanger is located at the bottom of the 
thermal barrier assembly below the pump radial bearing.  The function of this heat 
exchanger is to cool any reactor coolant leaking up the shaft to protect the radial 
bearing and shaft seals.   
 
Seal injection water is normally supplied to the reactor coolant pump from the CVCS 
(Figure 3.2-17).  This water is injected into the pump at a point between the radial 
bearing and the thermal barrier heat exchanger.  Of the eight (8) gallons per minute 
 total injection flow  to each RCP, three (3) gpm flow upward through the radial 
bearing and pump seals and five (5) gpm flow downward through the heat 
exchanger and into the RCS.  This downward flow acts as a buffer to prevent the hot 
reactor coolant from entering the bearing and seal area.   
 
The reactor coolant pump is designed to operate with either seal injection or thermal 
barrier heat exchanger cooling.  However, it is desirable to maintain bearing and 
seal cooling from the purified and filtered seal injection water rather than the 
contaminated unfiltered reactor coolant leaking up the shaft from the RCS.  The 
thermal barrier heat exchanger is used as a backup if a loss of seal injection flow 
were to occur.  Under this condition approximately three (3) gpm (the normal shaft 
seal leakage) flows from the RCS through the heat exchanger to the pump radial 
bearing and the controlled leakage seal package.  Operation of the reactor coolant 
pump under these conditions is permitted only for a short period of time due to the 
fact that the unfiltered coolant flowing through the seal package could damage the 
seals.  Labyrinth seals between the shaft and heat exchanger force most of this 
water through the heat exchanger.  Component cooling water is the cooling medium 
for the thermal barrier heat exchanger.   
 
Coupling/Spool Piece - A spool piece connects the pump and motor shafts.  The 
spool piece can be removed to make the shaft seals accessible for maintenance 
without removing the motor.  
 
Shaft Seal Section - The function of the shaft seal assembly is to provide 
essentially zero leakage from the RCS along the pump shaft to the containment 
atmosphere during normal operating conditions.  The assembly consists of three 
seals, two of which are full design pressure seals and a third which is simply a 
leakage diversion seal.  Figure 3.2-18 shows the relative position of the three seals. 
The seal assembly is located concentric to the pump shaft as it passes through the 
main flange.  The seals are contained in a seal housing which is bolted to the top 
side of the main flange.  
 
The number one seal (Figure 3.2-18) is the main seal of the pump.  It is a controlled-
leakage, film-riding seal whose sealing surfaces do not contact each other.  Its 
primary components are a runner which rotates with the shaft and a nonrotating seal 
ring.  The seal ring and runner are faced with aluminum oxide coatings.  If the two 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-19 Rev 1203 
surfaces come in contact during operation, the seal will be damaged and excessive 
leakage will result.  The number one seal produces a 2200 psi pressure drop. 
 
During normal operation, cool injection water, at a pressure greater than RCS 
pressure, enters the pump through a connection on the thermal barrier flange at a 
rate of about eight gpm (Figure 3.2-19).  About five gpm of this injection water flows 
downward through the thermal barrier/heat exchanger and into the RCS.   
 
This downward flow of water prevents the primary coolant from entering the seal 
area of the pump.  The remaining 3 gpm of the injected water pass through the 
pump radial bearing and number one seal.  The seal is termed a Acontrolled-
leakage@ seal because the leakage through the seal is controlled to a design value 
and is maintained by floating the seal ring so that the gap between the non-rotating 
seal ring and the rotating seal runner is always held to a constant value (Figure 3.2-
20).   
 
To understand the concept of why the gap between the seal ring and the runner 
stays constant, it is necessary to examine the hydrostatic forces on the seal  ring by 
dividing them into Aclosing forces@ (those forces tending to close the gap) and 
Aopening forces@ (those forces tending to open the gap).  A constant closing force 
proportional to the pressure differential across the seal is imposed on the upper 
surface of the ring.  This is shown on Figure 3.2-20, as a rectangle on the force 
balance curve.   
 
At equilibrium conditions, an equal and opposite opening force acts on the bottom of 
the ring.  The nonuniform shape of the opening force distribution is due to the taper 
on the underside of the ring.  The taper causes the rate of change of the pressure 
drop, and thus the associated force, to be different from those in the parallel section 
of the ring.  If the gap closes, the seal ring moves downward and the percentage 
reduction of flow area in the parallel section is greater than that in the tapered 
section.  This causes the resistance to flow in the parallel section to increase more 
rapidly than it does in the tapered section.  This, in turn, distorts the force diagram 
and results in a slight increase in the opening force.  The increased opening force 
pushes the seal ring up, which causes the gap to widen until equilibrium conditions 
are again established.  Similarly, if the gap increases, the opening force decreases.  
The closing force (being greater) will then push the seal ring down and close the 
gap.  Again, the seal ring will be restored to its equilibrium position. 
 
If the pressure in the primary system is decreased, the shape of the force-balance 
diagram does not change.  However, the actual values of the forces decrease.  If 
the pressure in the RCS continues to decrease, the weight of the seal ring becomes 
a large part of the Aclosing@ force. 
 
At pressure differentials below about 200 psid, the hydrostatic lifting forces become 
insufficient to float the seal ring, and contact between the seal ring and its runner 
may occur causing damage to both rings.  Therefore to prevent damage to the 
number one seal, it is not permitted to operate the pump with the number one seal 
differential pressures less than 275 psid.  The minimum required differential 
pressure of 275 psid should be obtained when the RCS pressure is 400 psig.   
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-20 Rev 1203 
The flow rate through the seals at lower RCS pressures decreases to a value less 
than that required to cool the pump radial bearing.  A penetration is provided to 
bypass some flow around the number one seal when the pressure in the RCS is 
less than 1500 psig (Figure 3.2-19).  This ensures adequate radial bearing cooling 
flow.  
 
The number two seal is a rubbing-face seal, with a graphitar-faced seal ring which 
rubs on an aluminum-oxide-coated stainless steel runner.  During normal operation, 
the number two seal directs the leakage from the number one seal to the CVCS 
(Figures 3.2-18 and 3.2-19).  
 
The function of the number two seal is to act as a backup in case of number one 
seal failure.  The number two seal has full operating pressure capability.  If the 
number one seal fails, it will pass greater amounts of water.  This is sensed by leak-
off flow detectors which are indicated and alarmed in the control room.  The 
operator should then shut the number one seal leak-off flow control valve.  This 
directs all number one seal leakage through the number two seal placing it into 
service as the primary seal.  The plant should then be shut down using normal 
procedures to replace the failed seal.  Normal leakage through the number two seal 
(number one seal not failed) is three gph.  
 
The number three seal is a rubbing face seal similar to the number two seal, except 
that it is not designed for full RCS pressure.  It is provided to divert the leakage from 
the number two seal to the RCDT.  The number two seal leak off is directed to a 
standpipe which maintains sufficient back pressure to ensure flow through the 
number three seal for cooling purposes.  The leak off from the number two seal is 
then piped from the top of the standpipe to the reactor coolant drain tank.  High and 
low level alarms on the standpipe alert the operator to malfunctions of the number 
two and three seals.  Number three seal leak off is also routed to the RCDT.  The 
normal leakage rate through the number three seal is 100 cc/hr.  
 
The primary components of the number three seal are a 304 stainless steel rotating 
runner with a chrome-carbide-coated rubbing face and a Graphitar 114 stationary 
ring which is fit to a 304 stainless steel holding ring.  The operation of the seal 
package ensures nearly zero leakage from the RCS at the reactor coolant pump 
shaft. 
 
Instrumentation - Temperature detectors are provided to monitor the seal water 
inlet temperature to the pump bearing and the number one seal outlet temperature.  
These are indicated and annunciated in the control room.  
 
Differential pressure across the number one seal is also indicated and annunciated 
in the control room to ensure minimum ΔP for pump operation (Figure 3.2-19).  This 
ensures sufficient gap between the number one seal ring and its runner.  Each RCP 
seal supply has a flow transmitter and flow indicator followed by a seal injection 
throttle valve, all are located outside containment. 
 
The number one seal leak-off flow is monitored, recorded and annunciated in the 
control room.  A high leak-off flow indicates a failed number one seal and alerts the 
operator to close the number one seal leak-off flow control valve to place the 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-21 Rev 1203 
number two seal in service.  A low flow is usually produced by low RCS pressure 
and indicates that insufficient seal leak off exists to ensure proper cooling for the 
pump bearing.  The operator should then open the number one seal bypass valve (a 
common valve for all pumps) to increase the leak off and provide sufficient cooling.  
 
Motor Section - The motor (Figure 3.2-16) is a vertical, six-pole, squirrel-cage 
induction motor of drip-proof construction.  It is equipped with upper and lower radial 
bearings, a double Kingsbury type thrust bearing, flywheel, antireverse rotation 
device, oil coolers, and appropriate instrumentation and support equipment.  The 
power supply for reactor coolant pump motors is from the non-vital plant electrical 
distribution system.  Design parameters for the RCP motors are listed in Table 3.2-
9. 
 
Flywheel - In the case of loss of power to the reactor coolant pumps, it is necessary 
to maintain a relatively high flow through the reactor core for a short while after 
reactor shutdown.  Each reactor coolant pump has a 13,200-lb flywheel keyed to the 
top of its shaft above the motor upper bearings.  The stored energy in the flywheel 
increases the total inertia extending the pump coastdown period by 22 to 30 
seconds.  This, in conjunction with the reactor protection system, assures adequate 
heat removal during a plant trip and loss of power to the RCPs.  The flow coastdown 
provided by the flywheel also assists in initiating natural circulation flow.  The 
flywheel is shown on Figures 3.2-16 and 3.2-21. 
 
Antireverse Rotation Device - If one reactor coolant pump is de-energized while 
the remaining pumps continue to operate, reverse flow will occur in the idle loop (the 
loop with the RCP that is off).  This reverse flow is not available for core cooling 
because it bypasses the core.  The reverse flow also would cause the pump to turn 
backwards.  Although this would produce no mechanical damage, an attempt to 
start the pump would produce excessively high starting currents which could 
overheat or otherwise damage the motor.  
 
To prevent the pump from turning backwards, an antireverse rotation device is 
provided (Figure 3.2-21).  The antireverse mechanism consists of eleven ratchet 
pawls mounted in the bottom of the flywheel at its outside diameter, a serrated 
ratchet plate that is mounted to the motor frame, and return springs and two shock 
absorbers for the ratchet plate which are also mounted to the motor frame.  After the 
pump has stopped, one pawl will engage the ratchet plate.  As the motor begins to 
rotate in the reverse direction, the ratchet plate will also rotate slightly until stopped 
by the shock absorbers.  When the motor is started, the return springs return the 
ratchet plate to its original position.  
 
As the motor speed increases, the pawls drag over the ratchet plate until the motor 
speed reaches approximately 80 rpm.  At this time, centrifugal force and friction 
keep the pawls in an elevated position.  
 
Thrust Bearing, Upper Radial Bearing, and Oil Lift System - The upper bearing 
is a combination double-Kingsbury-type thrust bearing (suitable for up or down 
thrust) and a radial guide bearing (Figure 3.2-16).  The babbitt-on-steel thrust 
bearing shoes are mounted on equalizing pads, which distribute the thrust load to all 
shoes equally. 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-22 Rev 1203 
The radial bearing is of conventional, babbitt-on-steel design.  Both the thrust and 
radial bearings are located in the upper oil pot and are submerged in oil.  During 
operation, the bearings are self lubricating and require no external oil pump.  Oil is 
circulated from the bearings to an external oil cooler by means of drilled passages in 
the thrust runner which act as a centrifugal pump.  Component cooling water 
provides the heat sink for the bearing cooler.  
 
The thrust bearing oil lift system is provided for pump starts to reduce starting 
currents and to prevent damage to the thrust bearing (the thrust bearing is only self-
lubricating at relatively high pump speeds).  A small, high pressure pump provides 
an oil film to lift the thrust shoes away from the thrust runner.  An interlock prevents 
starting the pump unless proper oil lift pressure has been present for a preset time.  
The oil lift pump is secured after the pump has been running for about a minute and 
is not required for pump shutdown.  
 
During operation, the thrust is carried by the upper thrust bearing.  This load is due 
to both RCS pressure and pump dynamic forces.  The only time the lower thrust 
shoes carry load is when the RCS pressure is at a pressure less than the minimum 
allowable for pump operation or when the motor is run uncoupled from the pump.  
 
Motor Lower Radial Bearing - The motor lower radial bearing is also a 
conventional, babbitt-on-steel design.  It is immersed in oil in the lower oil pot.  A 
cooling coil supplied by component cooling water is provided in the oil pot.  
 
Motor Air Cooling - The motor windings are air cooled.  Integral vanes on each end 
of the rotor force air through cooling slots in the motor frame.  It is then discharged 
to the containment atmosphere.  Some designs are supplied with air/water heat 
exchangers for additional cooling capacity.  
 
Instrumentation - The motor is provided with various instruments which may 
provide indication in the control room and in most cases will provide annunciation.  
These instruments include: 
 
1. Temperature detectors for stator and bearing temperatures, 
2. Oil level switches for both the upper and lower oil pots, which alarm in the control 
room on low level, 
3. Vibration monitors to detect pump misalignment or mechanical problems, and 
4. Ammeters to monitor motor starting and running currents.  
 
Cooling Water - It is essential that cooling water be supplied to the motor bearing 
coolers and thermal barrier heat exchanger during pump operation.  Although it is 
possible to operate the pump without damage with no cooling flow to the thermal 
barrier heat exchanger, operation under these conditions should be minimized.  If 
seal injection were lost while thermal barrier cooling was not available, hot reactor 
coolant would leak up the shaft into the bearing and seal area and damage these 
components.  
 
The component cooling water system supplies the reactor coolant pump heat 
exchangers.  The piping to the thermal barrier heat exchanger is designed to 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-23 Rev 1203 
withstand full system pressure in case of a leak in the heat exchanger.  The 
remainder of the system is low pressure piping.  
 
In the event of a leak from the RCS into the thermal barrier heat exchanger, a high 
flow is sensed in the component cooling return line.  This initiates an alarm and 
automatically isolates the return.  Isolation of the return stops the leak flow and the 
high pressure piping of the component cooling system becomes part of the RCS 
pressure boundary.  Component cooling water to the reactor coolant pumps is 
automatically isolated by a containment isolation phase B signal.   
 
If component cooling water is unavailable to the RCP oil coolers and motor coolers, 
the reactor coolant pumps must be secured within approximately two minutes.  
Additional information concerning the component cooling water system may be 
found in Chapter 14.0, Cooling Water Systems.  
 
 
3.2.4 Leakage Detection  
 
Detection of leakage from the RCS is accomplished by a number of diverse systems 
and methods.  Several of these are described below. 
  
1. The most sensitive indication of reactor coolant system leakage is the 
containment air monitoring system.  Experience has shown that the particulate 
activity in the containment atmosphere responds very rapidly to increased 
leakage.  Systems are provided to monitor particulate and gaseous activity from 
the areas enclosing the reactor coolant system components so that any leakage 
from them will be easily detected. 
 
2. Any leakage will cause an increase in the amount of makeup water required to 
maintain a normal level in the pressurizer.  The makeup rate is monitored and 
any unexplained increase indicates a leak.  The magnitude of the leak can be 
calculated by measuring the increased makeup requirements. 
 
3. Leakage through the head to vessel closure jo int will result in flow to the leak-off 
between the double gaskets of the closure and produce a high temperature 
alarm. 
 
4. Other methods of detecting leakag e in the containment are containment 
pressure, temperature, humidity, containment condensate measurement, visual 
inspection, ultrasonic inspection and the containment sump water level.  Primary-
to-secondary system leakage is detected by the air ejector and steam generator 
blow down monitors as well as by chemical analysis of secondary water 
samples. 
 
3.2.5 Vibration and Loose Parts Monitoring 
 
The purpose of the vibration and loose parts monitoring system (VLPMS) is to 
detect the presence of unexpected impacts within the boundary of the RCS and to 
actuate alarms to warn plant operators of the abnormal condition. The VLPMS 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-24 Rev 1203 
equipment is installed to guard against inadvertent operation of the RCS with 
inadequately secured parts or drifting metallic parts within the coolant system. 
 
The major components of the VLPMS are accelerometer sensors, preamplifiers, 
indicator assembly, audio monitor, FM cassette tape recorder, X-Y plotter and a 
chart recorder with selector switches. 
 
Accelerometer sensors - There are 12 sensors installed at various locations 
(Figure 3.2-22) on the external surfaces of RCS components and piping.  The 
purpose of these sensors is to monitor the sonic outputs of the components and 
piping (Figures 3.2-23, 24, 25). 
 
Preamplifiers - A preamplifier is installed in the circuitry from each accelerometer 
sensor to boost the sensor output signal before its transmission to signal processing 
and alarm instrumentation in the control room. 
 
Indicator assembly - The indicator assembly receives amplified signals from the 
preamplifiers.  The amplification and signal conditioning assure that only valid 
metallic impact signals will provide alarm indications. 
 
Audio monitor - The audio monitor is an amplifier and speaker assembly that 
provides an audible means of detecting vibration or loose parts at each of the 12 
sensor locations. 
 
Cassette tape recorder - The FM tape recorder provides on-line recording of 
signals from any of the 12 sensors. 
 
Spectrum analyzer - The spectral analyzer operates in the low frequency or audio 
range and measures the amplitude and frequencies of the spectral components of 
an input signal which allows a more detailed analysis of sensor signals. 
 
X-Y plotter - The plotter may be used to produce graphic tracings showing the 
relationship between two variable functions. 
 
Chart recorder - The recorder is a dual pen recorder capable of recording an 
appropriate voltage that represents any type of variable data. 
 
 
3.2.6 System Interrelationships  
 
3.2.6.1 Materials of Construction  
 
Each of the materials used in the RCS is selected for the expected environment and 
service conditions.  All RCS materials which are exposed to the coolant are 
corrosion resistant.  These materials are stainless steels and Inconel, and they are 
chosen for specific purposes at various locations within the system for their 
compatibility with the reactor coolant.  
  
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-25 Rev 1203 
The phenomena of stress corrosion cracking and corrosion fatigue are not generally 
encountered unless a specific combination of conditions is present.  The necessary 
conditions are a susceptible alloy, an aggressive environment, stress, and time.  
Therefore, to minimize or prevent stress corrosion of the RCS components, strict 
chemistry specifications must be maintained to control the aggressive environment 
of the reactor coolant.  
 
3.2.6.2 Heatup and Cooldown Limits  
 
The maximum rates of heatup and cooldown are based upon the total stress and 
temperature of the reactor vessel.  There is a temperature below which the metal of 
the reactor vessel may experience brittle fracture.  Brittle fracture is the catastrophic 
failure (cracking) of a material with little or no plastic deformation.  Conditions 
necessary to produce brittle fracture are a susceptible material, an existing flaw 
(stress riser), low temperature, and stress.  
 
The nil-ductility transition (NDT) temperature of the reactor vessel material opposite 
the core is established at a Charpy V-notch test value of 30 ft-lb or greater.  The 
material is tested to verify conformity to specified requirements and to determine the 
actual NDT temperature value.  In addition, this material is 100 percent 
volumetrically inspected by ultrasonic test using both straight beam and angle beam 
methods.  The transition temperature is increased by exposure to radiation, and this 
must be accounted for in setting operating limits.   
 
Stresses on the reactor vessel wall are produced by reactor coolant system 
pressure and the differential temperature between the inner and outer walls which 
exists during heatup or cooldown.  The pressure stresses upon the reactor vessel 
are tensile stresses.  The stresses due to heatup are compressive on the inner wall 
and tensile on the outer wall.  Therefore, the heatup-induced stresses subtract from 
the pressure stresses on the inner wall of the vessel.  This results in a lower overall 
stress on the inner wall.  
 
The stresses due to cooldown are tensile on the inner wall and compressive on the 
outer wall.  Therefore, the cooldown-induced stresses add to the pressure stresses 
on the inner wall of the vessel.  This results in an overall stress which is larger than 
the pressure-only stress on the inner wall.  
 
To limit the maximum stress on the vessel to within allowable limits, reactor coolant 
pressure and temperature must be appropriately regulated.  Typical pressure and 
temperature limit curves are shown in Figures 3.2-26 and 3.2-27.  The curves are 
plots of allowable pressure vs. temperature for various heatup and cooldown rates.  
Permissible operation is below and to the right of the heatup and cooldown limit 
curves.  The criticality limit on Figure 3.2-26 defines a minimum temperature at 
which criticality may be achieved in order to limit pressure excursions which could 
occur with a critical reactor.  
 
In actual operation, other limits prevent the reactor from being made critical until 
operating temperatures are achieved.  Typical design thermal and loading cycles for 
the RCS are shown in Table 3.2-10. 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-26 Rev 1203 
 
 
3.2.6.3 Natural Circulation 
 
It is essential to ensure sufficient flow to remove reactor decay heat even when 
reactor coolant pumps are not operating.  The higher elevation of the steam 
generators relative to the reactor vessel produces a thermal driving head to 
establish and maintain flow in the RCS when heat is removed from the steam 
generators by dumping steam.  Natural circulation flow is sufficient only for decay 
heat removal of a shutdown reactor, not for power operation. 
 
 
3.2.7 PRA Insights  
 
3.2.7.1 Reactor Coolant Pump Seals  
 
The purpose of the reactor coolant pump seals is to ensure nearly zero leakage 
from the reactor coolant pumps to the containment.  A failure of the reactor coolant 
pump seals is a small break loss of coolant accident, which requires the high head 
injection system to be operable to supply core cooling, and later the recirculation 
system to provide the long-term core cooling. 
 
For PRA accident sequences the failure of the reactor coolant pump seals is a result 
of the loss of component cooling water initiator and the loss of all ac power initiator.  
Both of these initiators result in a loss of the pump seals, followed within a certain 
amount of time by core damage due to the unavailability of the high-head injection 
and/or recirculation system.  The time to core damage is very dependent upon the 
assumed size of the seal LOCA, and the time between the seal LOCA occurring and 
the time of recovery of the high pressure injection flow.  The causes of a loss of ac 
power and the loss of component cooling water are discussed in the appropriate 
chapters. 
 
3.2.7.2 Pressurizer Power-Operated Relief Valves 
 
The pressurizer power-operated relief valves are used to limit the primary pressure 
on transients in order to avoid a reactor trip on high RCS pressure and lifting of the 
code safety valves. The pressurizer PORVs are also used to remove the heat from 
the core if no other methods of heat removal are available. 
 
The failure of the pressurizer power-operated relief valves is present in several 
accident sequences which lead to core damage.  There are two general failure 
modes for the relief valves.  First, the failure of the power-operated relief valve(s) to 
shut when required leads to the need for recirculation cooling of the reactor, and the 
subsequent failure of the recirculation mode of the emergency core cooling system 
results in core damage.  The second failure is the failure to open when required for 
the purpose of initiating bleed and feed cooling for the reactor.  This failure of heat 
removal results in core damage.  At Surry, the failure of the PORVs to shut and, 
therefore, requiring recirculation cooling, are present in the accident sequences 
which are 21.2% of the core damage frequency.  The failure of the PORVs to open 
which limits the bleed and feed capability are 4.4% at Surry and 3.2% at Sequoyah. 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-27 Rev 1203 
The values for bleed and feed capability will be affected by whether the plant 
requires one or two relief valves to open to provide sufficient flow for bleed and feed. 
 
Probable causes of a loss of the power-operated relief valves are : 
 
1. Failure of the PORVs to open on demand, 
2. Failure of the block valve to shut to isolate a stuck open relief valve, or 
3. Failure of the power supply to the PORVs. 
 
NUREG-1150 studies on importance measures have shown that the power-
operated relief valves are not a major contributor to risk achievement or risk 
reduction. 
 
 
3.2.8 Summary  
 
The reactor coolant piping and components circulate the reactor coolant to transfer 
the energy produced in the reactor to the steam system to produce electrical output 
from the turbine generator.  The reactor coolant piping is part of the primary 
pressure boundary and is considered the second line of defense to the release of 
fission products to the environment.  The first line of defense is the fuel cladding and 
the third is the reactor containment building.  Appropriate supports and seismic 
restraints are provided to ensure the integrity of the RCS pressure boundary during 
normal and accident operations, including the effects of the design basis 
earthquake.  
 
The pressurizer, with heaters, sprays, and relief and safety valves, is used to 
pressurize the RCS during plant startup, to maintain normal RCS pressure during 
steady-state operation, to limit pressure changes during RCS transients, and to 
prevent RCS pressure from exceeding design values.  Pressurizer pressure, level, 
and temperature instrumentation is provided for indication, control, and protection.  
 
The steam generators are vertical, shell-and-U-tube heat exchangers which transfer 
energy from the radioactive reactor coolant to the nonradioactive steam system.  
The dry, saturated steam produced is used to operate the main turbine and 
auxiliaries to produce electricity.  The steam generator U-tubes provide the 
boundary between the primary and secondary systems.  Steam generator level, 
steam flow, feed flow and steam pressure instrumentation is provided for indication, 
control, and protection.  
 
The reactor coolant pumps provide sufficient flow to ensure adequate heat transfer 
from the RCS to the steam generators.  A flywheel extends flow coastdown after a 
loss of power to maintain flow through the core and help establish natural 
circulation.  An antireverse rotation device prevents the pump from turning 
backwards which would increase core bypass flow and pump starting current.  Shaft 
sealing is accomplished by a film-riding, controlled-leakage seal with a backup, 
rubbing-face seal.  Seal injection from the CVCS, or flow from the RCS through the 
thermal barrier heat exchangers, cools and lubricates the seals and pump bearings. 
Cooling for the motor bearings and thermal barrier heat exchangers is from the 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-28 Rev 1203 
component cooling water system.  Electrical power to the pump motors is from a 
non-vital supply. 
 
Reactor coolant piping is constructed of stainless steel and is sized to limit 
maximum flow velocities and provide proper pump suction characteristics.  
Penetrations which could experience large thermal stresses have thermal sleeves. 
  
Reactor coolant system temperature instrumentation consists of well-mounted and 
direct-immersion RTDs.  The direct-immersion detectors are located in the RTD 
bypass manifolds.  These instruments are used to supply indication of T
avg  and ΔT. 
 
Reactor coolant flow is measured by elbow flow monitors which do not introduce a 
pressure drop in the reactor coolant flow.  This flow signal is used for indication and 
protection. 
 
Leakage detection is accomplished by containment activity monitors; observation of 
RCS makeup requirements; containment sump level, pressure, temperature and 
humidity monitors; and steam generator activity monitors.  
 
Heatup and cooldown limits maintain the reactor vessel total stresses to within 
limits, especially during low temperature operation, when the vessel might be 
susceptible to brittle fracture.  The transition temperature from brittle to ductile 
fracture increases with exposure of the vessel to radiation, so the limits become 
more restrictive as the plant ages.  
 
The orientation of the major components in the RCS is designed so that a thermal 
driving head will exist to produce natural circulation flow if the RCPs are not 
operating.  Natural circulation flow is sufficient for removal of reactor decay heat.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-29 Rev 1203 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-1 
Reactor Coolant Piping Design Parameters 
 
Inlet piping - inside diameter 27.5" 
Inlet piping - nominal thickness 2.69" 
Outlet piping - inside diameter 29.0" 
Outlet piping - nominal thickness 2.84" 
RCP suction piping - inside diameter 31.0" 
RCP suction piping - nominal thickness 2.99" 
  
Design pressure 2,485 psig 
Design temperature 650°F 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-2 
Pressurizer Design Parameters 
 
Design pressure 2,485 psig 
Hydrostatic test pressure 3,107 psig 
Design Temperature 680°F 
  
Volume 1,800 ft 3 
Full power water volume 1,080 ft 3 
Full power steam volume 720 ft 3 
  
Shell - inside diameter 84.0" 
Surge line - inside diameter 14.0" 
Surge line - wall thickness 1.40" 
Surge line design temperature 680°F 
Heater capacity 1,794 kW 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-3 
Spray Control Valve Design Parameters 
 
Number of spray valves 2 
Design pressure 2,485 psig 
Design temperature 650°F 
Design flow rate per valve 420 gpm 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-30 Rev 1203 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-4 
Code Safety Valve Design Parameters 
 
Number of code safety valves 3 
Set pressure 2,485 psig 
Design temperature 680°F 
Relieving capacity per safety valve 420,000 lb/hr 
  
Normal backpressure 3 psig 
Maximum backpressure during discharge 500 psig 
  
Accumulation 3% 
Blowdown 5% 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-5 
Pressurizer Power Operated Relief Valve Design Parameters 
 
 
Number of power operated relief valves 
 
2 
 
Design pressure 
 
2,485 psig 
 
Design temperature 
 
680°F 
 
Relieving capacity per relief valve 
 
210,000 lb/hr 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-6 
Pressurizer Relief Tank Design Parameters 
 
Volume 1,800 ft
3 
Design pressure 100 psig 
Design temperature 340°F 
Rupture disc release pressure 100 psig 
Rupture disc relieving capacity 1.6x10 6 lb/hr 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-31 Rev 1203 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-7 
Steam Generator Design Parameters 
 
Number of steam generators 4 
Design pressure RCS side 2,485 psig 
Design pressure steam side 1,185 psig 
Design temperature RCS side 650°F 
Design temperature steam side 600°F 
  
Height 67.75' 
Shell - outside diameter 175.75" 
U-Tubes - number 3,388 
U-Tubes - number 0.875" 
U-Tubes - number 0.050" 
  
Steam generator conditions at full load  
Steam flow 3.77x10 6 lb/hr 
Steam pressure 895 psig 
Steam temperature 533.3°F 
Moisture carryover - weight 0.25% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-8 
Reactor Coolant Pump Design Parameters 
 
Number of reactor coolant pumps 4 
Design pressure 2,485 psig 
Design temperature 650°F 
RCP capacity per pump 88,500 gpm 
Speed rating 1,200 rpm 
Discharge head 277 ft 
Minimum required NPSH 170 ft 
  
Overall height 28.5 ft 
Overall weight 188,900 lb 
Suction nozzle - inside diameter 31.0" 
Discharge nozzle -inside diameter 27.5" 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 3.2-32 Rev 1203 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-9 
Reactor Coolant Pump Motor Design Parameters 
 
Horsepower rating 6,000 
Voltage 12,500Vac 
Phase 3 
Frequency 60 hz 
  
Power (cold RCS) 5,997 kW 
Power (hot RCS) 4,540 kW 
Starting current 3,000 amps 
  
AC induction motor, single speed, air cooled.  Insulation class B, 
thermoplastic epoxy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.2-10 
Thermal and Loading Cycle Design Parameters 
 
 Design Cycles
 
Heatup at <100°F/hr 200 
Cooldown at <100°F/hr 200 
  
Loss of load without an immediate reactor trip 80 
Loss of offsite power 40 
Loss of RCS flow (one pump only) 80 
Reactor trip from 100% power 400 
Auxiliary spray >320°F differential 10 
Main RCS pipe break 1 
Safe shutdown earthquake 1 
Leak test at >2335 psig 50 
RCS hydrostatic test >3107 5 
Steam line break >6" in diameter 1 
Steam generator hydrostatic test >1485 psig 5 
Turbine rolls on pump heat with >100°F/hr 
cooldown 
10 
  
 
---PAGE---
 
 
0995-32
3.2-7
FIGURE3 . 2-1 Reactor Coolant Loop Penetrations  
---PAGE---
 
 
 
HIGH HEAD SI
HIGH HEAD SI
EXCESS LETDOWN
R.V. FLANGE LEAKOFF
NORMAL CHARGING
HIGH HEAD SI
HIGH HEAD SI
ALTERNATE CHARGING
0595-32
3.2-7
Figure3 . 2-2 Reactor Coolant System
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-3 Pressurizer Spray Scoop
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-4 Sample Connection Scoop
---PAGE---
 
 
 
REACTOR COOLANT
PIPE
 
 
 
 
 
 
FLOW
1.33" DIA
FLOW
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-5
---PAGE---
 
 
 
22-1/2
B
B
15
15
SECTION BB
LOW PRESSURE
TAPS
HIGH PRESSURE
TAP
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-6 Reactor Coolant Flow Taps
---PAGE---
 
 
 
RELIEF
NOZZLE
HEATER SUPPORT
PLATE
SURGE NOZZLE
SUPPORT SKIRT
ELECTRICAL HEATER
INSTRUMENTATION
NOZZLE
LOWER HEAD
SHELL
LIFTING
TRUNNION
(LOAN BASIS)
INSTRUMENTATION
NOZZLE
UPPER HEAD
MANWAY
SAFETY NOZZLE
SPRAY NOZZLE
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2-7 Pressurizer
---PAGE---
 
 
 
1
7
4
5
2 3
6
1. Upper Head of Vessel
2. Spray Nozzle
3. Spray Nozzle Locking Bar
4. Manway Cover
5. Manway Cover Bolt
6. Manway Cover Insert Assembly
7. Lifting Eye Bolt Location
5"
1/2"
3/4"R
3/8" DIA
Matl to Stainless Steel, 18-8 Type 304
Spray Nozzle Locking Bar Detail  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-8 Manway Cover and Spray Nozzle
---PAGE---
 
 
 
DEMISTERS SECONDARY
MOISTURE SEPARATOR
ORFICE RINGS
SWIRL VANE PRIMARY
MOISTURE SEPARATOR
FEEDWATER INLET
ANTIVIBRATION BARS
WRAPPER
TUBE SUPPORT PLATES
BLOWDOWN LINE
TUBE SHEET
PRIMARY MANWAY
PRIMARY COOLANT INLET
STEAM OUTLET TO TURBINE GENERATOR
SECONDARY MANWAY
UPPER SHELL
FEEDWATER RING
TUBE BUNDLE
LOWER SHELL
SECONDARY HANDHOLE
TUBE LANE BLOCK
PRIMARY COOLANT OUTLET
0199-3
Figure 3.2-9 Model 51 Steam generator
---PAGE---
 
 
 
0990-32
3.2
FIGURE 3.2-10 Steam Generator Flow Paths
STEAM OUTLET
SECONDARY SEPARATORS
(MIST EXTRACTORS)
RECIRCULATING WATER
SWIRL VANE MOISTURE
SEPARATOR
STEAM GENERATOR
SHELL
TUBE BUNDLE WRAPPER
(TUBE SHROUD)
DOWNCOMER
REACTOR
COOLANT
OUTLET
REACTOR
COOLANT
INLET
NORMAL WATER LEVEL
AT 100% POWER
FEEDWATER INLET
NOZZLE
STEAM - WATER
MIXTURE
---PAGE---
 
 
 
J-tube
positions
J-tubes
J-TUBE CONFIGURATION
FEEDRING STEAM GENERATOR
FEEDRING ASSEMBLY
FEEDRING TYPE STEAM GENERATOR
L
Feedwater line
S/G Shell
Thermal sleeve
Tee connection
Feedring
251-3/4 inch diameter flow holes
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-11 Feed Ring Assemblies 
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-12 Feedring and Moisture Separators 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-17 Seal Water Injection and Leakoff 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-20 Controlled Leakage Shaft Seal
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-22 Vibration and Loose Part Monitoring Transducer Locations 
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2-25 Vibration and Loose Parts Monitoring Indicator Assembly
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
