 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 9.2 
 
Incore Instrumentation System
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -i Rev 0404 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
9.2 INCORE INSTRUMENTATION SYSTEM ..................................................... 9.2-1 
 
9.2.1 Introduction .......................................................................................... 9.2-1 
 
9.2.2 System Description .............................................................................. 9.2-2 
 
9.2.2.1 Incore Neutron Monitoring System ......................................... 9.2-2 
9.2.2.2 Incore Temperature Monitoring System ................................. 9.2-3 
 
9.2.3 Component Descriptions ...................................................................... 9.2-4 
 
9.2.3.1 Conduits, Guide Thimbles, Isolation Valves, and Seal Table . 9.2-4 
9.2.3.2 Drive Unit Assemblies ............................................................. 9.2-5 
9.2.3.3 Transfer Device Assemblies and Isolation Valves .................. 9.2-6 
9.2.3.4 Interconnecting Tubing Runs .................................................. 9.2-6 
9.2.3.5 Detector and Drive Cable Assemblies .................................... 9.2-7 
9.2.3.6 Readout and Contro l Equipment ............................................ 9.2-7 
9.2.3.7 Gas Purge System................................................................ 9.2-10 
9.2.3.8 Leak Detection System ......................................................... 9.2-10 
9.2.3.9 Thermoc ouples ..................................................................... 9.2-10 
9.2.3.10 Thermocouple Reference Junction Box................................ 9.2-10 
9.2.3.11 Thermocouple Indicator ........................................................ 9.2-11 
 
9.2.4 Operation and System Interrelationships ........................................... 9.2-11 
 
9.2.4.1 Detector Calibrations ............................................................ 9.2-11 
9.2.4.2 Flux-Mapping  Procedure ...................................................... 9.2-11 
9.2.4.3 Incore-Excore Calibration ..................................................... 9.2-12 
9.2.4.4 Comput er .............................................................................. 9.2-14 
9.2.4.5 Incore Data Collection .......................................................... 9.2-14 
 
9.2.5 Summary ............................................................................................ 9.2-16 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
9.2-1 Movable Detector Design Parameters ..................................................... 9.2-17 
9.2-2 Thermocouple Design  Parameters .......................................................... 9.2-17 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -ii Rev 0404 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
9.2-1 ................................. Thermocouple and Flux Thimble Locations (4 Loop Plant) 
9.2-2 ....................................................................................... Incore Fission Chamber 
9.2-3 .................................................................................... Movable Detector System 
9.2-4 ..................................................... Incore Nuclear Instrumentation Drive System 
9.2-5 .................................................................. Incore Detector Control and Readout 
9.2-6 ................................................................. Incore Common Controls and Display 
9.2-7 ......................................................................................... Incore Instrumentation 
9.2-8 ..................................................................... Incore Thermocouple Arrangement 
9.2-9 ............................................................. Drive System for Incore Instrumentation 
9.2-10 ............................................................. Gas Purge and Leak Detection System 
9.2-11 ............................................................................................ Flux Profile Curves 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -1 Rev 0404 
9.2 INCORE INSTRUMENTATION SYSTEM  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. State the purposes of the incore instrumentation system. 
 
2. Briefly describe the two types of incore instrumentation and the information 
available from each. 
 
3. Describe the method used to detect flux thimble leakage. 
 
4. Deleted. 
 
5. List the uses of the data obtained from the incore instrumentation. 
 
 
9.2.1 Introduction  
 
The purposes of the incore instrumentation system are to provide information on 
neutron flux distribution and fuel assembly outlet temperatures at selected core 
locations.  The incore instrumentation system provides data acquisition only and 
performs no protective or plant operational control functions.  The incore 
instrumentation system includes the movable incore neutron flux monitoring system 
and the incore temperature monitoring system.  The number of incore temperature 
monitoring thermocouples and the number of flux thimble paths available within the 
core for the movable detectors varies according to whether the plant is a two-,  
three-, or four-loop Westinghouse design.  The locations of the incore flux thimbles 
and thermocouples within the reactor core of a four-loop Westinghouse plant are 
shown in Figure 9.2-1. 
 
The incore neutron monitoring system consists of miniature fission chambers with 
sufficient sensitivity to permit measurement of localized neutron flux distribution 
variations within the reactor core.  The data obtained from the incore neutron flux 
monitoring system is used to: 
 
1. Routinely verify that the following power distribution hot channel factors are in  
compliance with technical specification limits: 
 
a. Heat flux hot channel factor (F
Q(Z)), and 
b. Nuclear enthalpy rise hot channel factor (F N
ΔH); 
 
2. Calibrate the excore power range nuclear instruments for axial flux difference 
(AFD); 
 
3. Verify control rod positions when the rod position indication system is inoperable; 
and 
 
4. Verify that the quadrant power tilt ratio (QPTR) meets the technical specification 
limit with core power > 75% and with one or more power range neutron flux 
channels inoperable. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -2 Rev 0404 
The incore temperature monitoring system consists of fixed thermocouples, referred 
to as core-exit thermocouples (CETs), positioned at the top of the upper core plate.  
They measure the core outlet coolant temperatures of instrumented fuel assemblies. 
This data is used to: 
 
1. Provide inputs to the subcooling margin monitors, 
 
2. Provide the operators with indications of inadequate core cooling conditions     
during emergency situations, and 
 
3. Provide inputs to plant computer computational applications which use core-exit 
temperatures to determine fuel assembly enthalpy rises and limited power 
distribution information.  This information is not used to verify compliance with 
technical specification requirements.  Anomalous core-exit thermocouple 
readings may indicate a serious core condition and should be investigated. 
 
 
9.2.2 System Description 
 
9.2.2.1 Incore Neutron Monitoring System  
 
Movable miniature fission chamber detectors (Figure 9.2-2), containing U
308 
(uranium oxide) enriched to greater than 90 percent in U-235, enable detailed 
neutron flux (power level) mapping of the reactor core.   Each detector is attached to 
a flexible drive cable that can be driven into selected core locations by the plant 
operating staff.  When not in use, the detectors are stored in a shielded concrete 
vault to minimize radiation exposure to plant personnel.   
 
Figure 9.2-3 shows the basic system for the insertion of the movable miniature 
fission chamber into the core.  Retractable detector thimbles, into which the 
miniature detectors are driven, are positioned as shown.  Since these retractable 
detector thimbles are sealed at the leading (reactor) end, they are dry inside.  The 
thimbles thus serve as a pressure barrier between the reactor water pressure 
(design pressure of 2500 psig) and the atmosphere.  Mechanical high pressure 
seals between the retractable thimbles and the conduits are provided at the seal 
table.  During normal plant operation, these retractable thimbles are stationary and 
fully inserted into selected fuel assemblies.  The detector thimbles are retracted 
from the core before refueling or during core maintenance periods at which time the 
reactor coolant system is depressurized.   
 
The drive system for the insertion and withdrawal of miniature fission chamber 
detectors consists of drive units, limit switch assemblies, five-path rotary transfer 
devices, ten-path rotary transfer devices, and isolation valves.  The drive units are 
mounted permanently on a platform directly above the seal table. The remaining 
components, between the drive units and the seal table, are mounted on a movable 
support assembly which is moved aside when the retractable detector thimbles are 
withdrawn from the core.  The drive units push the hollow helical-wrap drive cables, 
with the miniature fission chamber detectors attached, into the core.  The helical-
wrap drive cables have small diameter coaxial cables threaded through their hollow 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -3 Rev 0404 
centers for transmitting the current signal produced by the miniature fission chamber 
detector. 
 
The six movable incore detectors, a typical number for a Westinghouse designed 
four-loop unit, are designated Detector A through Detector F, as shown on Figure 
9.2-4.  Additional movable incore detector information may be found in Table 9.2-1.  
During normal operation, each detector is used to measure the relative neutron flux 
in the detector thimbles connected to the correspondingly-lettered ten-path rotary 
transfer device; i.e., detector A is normally selected to a core path provided by the 
AA@ ten-path transfer device.  However, by means of the operation selector switch 
(five-path transfer device), each detector can also be routed through several other 
paths.  Each detector can be sent into each path of the next sequentially-lettered 
ten-path transfer device to serve as an operational spare detector for those thimbles 
(i.e., A for B, B for C, C for D, etc.).  For detector normalization purposes, each 
detector can be routed separately into a common calibrate path, thus providing 
direct correlation of the detectors.  Each detector can also be routed into any path of 
common group AC@, or to a shielded area for storage. 
 
The readout and control equipment is mounted in a control console (equipment 
racks) located in the control room.  This equipment provides indication and control to 
make flux maps of the reactor core either by semiautomatic control or by manual 
manipulation of the controls.  The control console contains separate controls, digital 
position display and power supplies for each detector.   
 
Common equipment, including core path display panel, one common control panel, 
special low level readout, and two-pen recorders, are also included in the console 
assembly (Figures 9.2-5 and 9.2-6). 
 
9.2.2.2 Incore Temperature Monitoring System  
 
Fixed incore thermocouples, made of chromel-alumel, are provided to monitor the 
outlet temperature of selected fuel assemblies.  Fuel assembly inlet and outlet 
temperatures are used to determine the heat input, or enthalpy rise ( Δh), of the fuel 
assembly. When the enthalpy of the monitored assemblies at various locations is 
compared, a radial power distribution map can be generated.  The core locations for 
the CET’s for a typical four-loop plant are shown in Figure 9.2-1.  Additional 
thermocouple information is provided in Table 9.2-2. 
 
The thermocouple sensing elements are mounted on and above the upper core 
plate at the point where the reactor coolant exits the fuel assemblies (Figure 9.2-7).  
The thermocouple leads are sheathed in stainless steel conduits and are routed 
from the upper core plate to the upper support plate inside of support columns.  The 
conduits are then routed from above the upper support plate to the reactor head 
penetrations via thermocouple port columns which exit the reactor vessel head with 
thirteen thermocouple leads exiting from each of the five thermocouple port 
columns.  A sealing arrangement is provided for each of the thermocouple port 
column penetrations and is part of the reactor coolant system pressure boundary 
(Figure 9.2-8).   
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -4 Rev 0404 
The thermocouple leads are routed to either of two reference junction boxes.  The 
reference junction box temperature is controlled where the transition is made 
between the chromel-alumel thermocouple leads and the copper instrument wires.  
If the temperature at this transition is allowed to vary unacceptable errors would be 
introduced in the temperature signal.  
 
The core exit thermocouples have the advantage of continuously providing data 
which is easily converted to power by determining the enthalpy rise in the 
instrumented fuel assemblies.  As opposed to the incore flux detectors, which are 
operated on an intermittent basis, the CETs provide continuous on-line radial power 
sharing measurements.  However, this instrumentation system has the 
disadvantage of measurement uncertainties and possible errors due to reactor 
coolant flow mixing patterns at the detector location.  To reduce the uncertainty in 
the thermocouple measurements and provide an accurate radial power 
measurement for on-line monitoring, the incore thermocouples are normalized to 
incore flux detector data during periodic surveillance tests.  The CET readings are 
continuously monitored by the plant computer and may be read individually in the 
control room.   
 
 
9.2.3 Component Descriptions 
 
9.2.3.1 Conduits, Guide Thimbles, Isolation Valves, and Seal Table 
 
Referring to Figure 9.2-3, stainless steel conduits extend from the bottom of the seal 
table down through the instrument tunnel and then up to the bottom of the reactor 
vessel.  The conduits are welded, to the bottom of a seal table and to the 
penetration nozzles on the lower reactor vessel head, to form a leak-tight boundary. 
Therefore, the conduits, once filled with reactor coolant, become an extension to the 
reactor coolant system pressure boundary.  The conduits guide and protect the 
guide thimbles between the seal table and the lower reactor vessel head.   
 
The guide thimbles are closed at their leading (reactor) end and open at their trailing 
(seal table) end.  The guide thimbles are dry on the inside and serve as a pressure 
boundary between the reactor coolant system (2500 psia design pressure) and the 
atmosphere.  The somewhat flexible stainless steel guide thimbles are inserted 
through the seal table into the conduits.  They are pushed from the seal table to the 
bottom of the reactor vessel head and pass through the penetration nozzles.  From 
here they are inserted through the instrument guide tubes or the instrument guide 
extensions.  Finally the guide thimbles are routed through the lower internals to the 
fuel assemblies.  The guide thimbles remain stationary in the fuel assemblies during 
reactor operation and are retracted for refueling, maintenance, periodic inservice 
inspections, and work on the reactor vessel internals.  Since the guide thimbles are 
withdrawn by pulling them upward on the trailing ends, ample room for the 14 feet of 
withdrawal must be provided.  To accomplish this, the five and ten path rotary 
transfer devices are configured so they are capable of being moved away from the 
seal table. 
 
The seal table is a 3/8-in. thick, rectangular (8'6" by 2'6"), stainless steel plate 
mounted over the instrument tunnel.  The seal table has 58 penetrations for guide 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -5 Rev 0404 
thimbles and has two drain holes.  The seal table guide thimble penetrations are 
sealed with high pressure swagelok fittings during normal operations and low 
pressure swagelok fittings during refueling.  
 
A manually operated stainless steel isolation valve is provided at the seal table for 
each guide thimble.  When closed, the isolation valve forms a 2500 psia barrier to 
prevent steam leakage from the reactor coolant system in the event of rupture of the 
guide thimble.  The isolation valves are not designed to isolate a guide thimble with 
a detector or a drive cable inserted into the guide thimble.  Therefore, prior to 
closing this isolation valve, the incore detector and its drive cable must be withdrawn 
to a position above the isolation valve. 
 
9.2.3.2 Drive Unit Assemblies  
 
As shown in Figure 9.2-9, each movable detector has a drive unit assembly.  Each 
drive unit assembly is comprised of the following components: 
 
1. Gear motor and slip clutch - One two-speed reversible synchronous gear-motor 
is provided.  The drive motor is 3-phase, 460 volts, 60 Hz, 3600/600 rpm with a 
gear reducer and is capable of starting under maximum load.  The motor 
incorporates an integral brake when not in operation.  The continuous duty rating 
of this motor provides sufficient power to push a drive cable and detector through 
any guide path.   
 
2. Drive box - The drive box is designed to operate with the helical-wrap drive 
cable.  The 5-inch hobbed drive wheel is driven by the gear-motor through a slip 
clutch.  Low speed for the drive cable is 12 ft/min, and high speed is 72 ft/min.   
 
3. Storage reel - The storage equipment consists of a spring-loaded take-up reel 
with an integral locking device.  The reel has sufficient take-up torque to prevent 
the drive unit from overrunning the reel at maximum speed during a change from 
low to high speed, or during braking.  The storage reel accommodates 175 feet 
of drive cable and includes slip-ring assemblies which permit lead-out of 
electrical signals while the reel is rotating. 
 
4. Position transmitter - A position encoder is supplied which is capable of 
operating control panel indicators reading from 0000.0 to 9999.9 inches.  The 
encoder is driven at a speed proportional to the drive cable speed by means of a 
gear train from the drive wheel shaft.  Signals from the encoder are in binary-
coded-decimal form for position readout and controlled through the control 
console.   
 
5. Withdrawal limit switch (Figure 9.2-6) - A withdrawal limit switch, actuated by the 
detector, is provided at the inlet of each of the five-path rotary transfer devices.  
This withdrawal limit switch provides the following functions:  
 
a. Prevents the operation of both the five- and ten-path transfer devices 
associated with it when the detector is forward of the limit, 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -6 Rev 0404 
b. Stops automatic withdrawal when the detector reaches the withdrawal limit, 
and 
 
c. Actuates cable position lamps on the drive unit control panel in the control 
room. 
 
6. Safety Switch - A safety switch located near the outlet of the drive unit prevents 
any attempt to withdraw the detector back over the wheel. 
   
9.2.3.3 Transfer Device Assemblies and Isolation Valves 
 
1. Five Path Rotary Transfer Device and Limit Switch (Figure 9.2-9): 
 
a. One five-path rotary transfer device is provided with each drive unit for routing 
the detector into one of the five possible paths.  The 5-path transfer device 
consists of an S-shaped tube mounted inside a rotating assembly.  This 
assembly is bearing-mounted at each end and can be positioned to any one 
of the five outlets.  When an electrical signal is applied to change the detector 
path, the S-shaped tube is moved to the selected outlet path position.  Cam-
actuated microswitches send signals to the control panel for feedback of path 
selection. 
 
b. A withdrawal limit switch, actuated by the detector, is provided near the inlet 
of each five-path transfer device.  This switch prevents operation of the five-
path rotary transfer device unless the detector and cable is in the withdrawn 
position.  The switch also stops automatic withdrawal when the detector 
reaches the withdrawal limit switch.   
 
2. Wye Units - Wye unit assemblies are mounted as required to reduce the amount 
of interconnecting tubing between the five-path and ten-path rotary transfer 
assemblies.  Wye units are also installed between the five-path transfer devices 
and the calibration path.   
 
3. Ten-path Rotary Transfer Device - Each ten-path rotary transfer device is 
capable of routing a movable incore detector into each of ten different selectable 
flux thimbles.  Cam-actuated microswitches send signals to the control console 
for feedback of path selection.  Detector-actuated path indicator switches near 
the outlets of the ten-path transfer devices send signals to the path display panel 
in the control console for verification of proper core paths.   
 
9.2.3.4 Interconnecting Tubing Runs  
 
Interconnecting tubing runs are supplied for connecting the drive unit assemblies to 
the safety and withdrawal limit switches, and for connecting the 5-path transfer 
devices to its associated wye units and 10-path transfer devices.  Additional tubing 
runs are supplied for connecting the 5-path transfer devices to the calibration path 
and to the concrete shielded storage area.  Tubing runs also connect the 10-path 
transfer devices to the isolation valves, and connect the isolation valves to the seal 
table.  The isolation valve to seal table tubing runs are designed for 2500 psia and 
650°F. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -7 Rev 0404 
9.2.3.5 Detector and Drive Cable Assemblies  
  
The incore flux detector, a fission chamber, is 0.188 inches in diameter and 2.1 
inches long.  A bullet-shaped stainless steel shell (0.199 in. O.D.) encapsulates the 
fission chamber.  The stainless steel shell is welded to the leading end of a helical-
wrap drive cable.  Each incore flux detector is designed to have a minimum thermal 
neutron sensitivity of 1.0 x 10
-17 amps/nv (where nv = neutron flux in neutrons / cm2-
sec) and a maximum gamma sensitivity of 3.0 x 10-14 amps/R/hr. 
 
The carbon steel drive cable is a hollow-core helical wrapped cable which meshes 
with the hobbed drive wheel within the drive box.  Each drive cable has an outside 
diameter of 0.199-inches, and an inside diameter of 0.065 inches.  The flux detector 
is attached to a coaxial cable, 0.040 inches in diameter, which is threaded back 
through the hollow drive cable and terminates at the trailing end, with several feet of 
slack ending in an amphenol connector.  The drive cables (when new) are 
approximately 175 feet long.  This length allows one or two subsequent cuts of a 12 
- 14 foot section before the cable becomes too short for use.  Such cuts may be 
required for factory replacement of the flux detectors.   
 
9.2.3.6 Readout and Control Equipment  
 
Readout and control equipment is provided as described below and as shown on 
Figures 9.2-5 and 9.2-6. 
 
1. Position Indication and Control - One position indication and control panel is 
provided for each detector.  As an example the position indication and controls 
for the “A” detector are derived from signals sent from the “A” drive unit, and 
similarly for the other detectors.  The binary-coded-decimal (BCD) position signal 
from each encoder is presented as a nixie tube display of five decimal digits from 
0000.0 to 9999.9 inches.   
 
2. Operation Selector Switch - A six-position switch is provided for each detector 
drive to align the five-path rotary transfer device to the position associated with 
the selected mode of operation.  Indicator lights, adjacent to the switch position, 
are energized by microswitches.  These microswitches actuate when the five-
path rotary transfer device has reached the selected position.  The operation 
selector switch positions are discussed below: 
 
a. OFF - When the operation selector switch is placed in the OFF position, a red 
light adjacent to the switch is actuated, the detector is prohibited from 
moving, and the drive motor control relays are prevented from being 
energized.  In addition the five-path rotary transfer device is aligned to its 
NORMAL position. 
 
b. NORMAL - When the operation selector switch is placed in the NORMAL 
position, the five-path rotary transfer device is positioned to its normal ten-
path rotary transfer device. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -8 Rev 0404 
c. CALIBRATE - When the operation selector switch is placed in the 
CALIBRATE position, the five-path rotary transfer device is positioned to the 
wye units for the calibrate path. 
 
d. EMERGENCY - When the operation selector switch is placed in the 
EMERGENCY position, the five-path rotary transfer device is positioned to 
the next sequentially lettered ten-path rotary transfer device (drive A to ten-
path rotary device B, drive B to ten-path rotary device C, etc.). 
 
e. COMMON GROUP - When the operation selector switch is placed in the 
COMMON GROUP position, the five-path rotary transfer device is positioned 
to ten-path rotary transfer device C. 
 
f. STORAGE - When the operation selector switch is placed in the STORAGE 
position, the five-path rotary transfer device is positioned to the lead shielded 
concrete storage area located in the seal table room. 
   
3. Ten-Path Selector Switch - A ten-position individual path selector switch is 
provided for each group to align the ten-path transfer device with the selected 
detector thimble within that group.  Indicator lights adjacent to the switch 
positions are energized by microswitches on the associated ten-path rotary 
transfer device.  These microswitches close when the ten-path rotary transfer 
device has reached the selected position.   
 
 Path selection is always achieved on the path selector switch associated with the 
ten-path transfer device through which the detector must pass (e.g., if the A 
detector is to be operated in the EMERGENCY mode, path selection is made on 
the B path selector switch).  Detector-actuated microswitches at the outlet of the 
ten-path transfer devices energize path-display lights on the control console to 
indicate that the detector has actually reached that position in the selected path. 
 
4. Common Controls - Common control of  all detectors (simultaneous detector 
operation) or individual detector insertion and plotting are provided.  The 
operating circuits are electrically interlocked to prevent attempted simultaneous 
insertion of two detectors into the same path under automatic control.  The 
withdrawal limit switch is interlocked with the five-path and ten-path rotary 
transfer devices to prevent their rotation or realignment unless the associated 
detector is in the withdrawn position.   
 
5. Position Control - The position readout devices are also used in the control 
system to provide stop signals to the detector drive unit at a preset distance from 
the bottom of the core and at the top of the core for each selected path during 
automatic insertion.  The position readout devices also furnish an additional stop 
signal at the preset distance from the bottom after plotting.  A set of ten 
patchboard matrix selector switches (five top-of-core position pins and five 
bottom-of-core position pins) for each path is provided to preset the bottom-of-
core and top-of-core stop signals for normal operation.   
 
The stop positions are selected by insertion of pins of the correct lengths into the 
patchboard matrix to make contact as required.  Thumbwheel switches are 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -9 Rev 0404 
provided for position control settings in Emergency, Common Group, Storage 
and Calibrate modes of operation.  Top-of-core and bottom-of-core position 
settings are always established on the position control panel of the detector 
being run. 
 
Detector position control is accomplished by comparing the encoder binary-
coded-decimal (BCD) information with a decimal number created by the 
patchboard or thumbwheel switches.  Each comparator accepts the associated 
encoder BCD information and compares it with the decimal number presented by 
the setpoint limits.  To make this comparison, the decimal limit setting is 
converted into a BCD by the comparator. 
 
6. Drive Motor Control - When any operation selector switch is in an ON position 
and the automatic-manual switch is in the AUTOMATIC position, pushbuttons 
(INSERT, SCAN, RECORD, WITHDRAW) will control the drive motors.  When 
the automatic-manual switch is in the MANUAL position, the speed switch 
controls motor speed and the insert-withdraw toggle switch controls motor 
direction.  The drive selector switch (single/multiple) on the common control 
panel selects either all drives or any single drive.   
 
7. Detector Power Supplies - One power supply is mounted on each detector 
readout panel.  The power supply provides a “floating” dc voltage output 
continuously variable to 300 volts.   
 
8. Detector Current Readout - A current readout meter, having a range of 0-50 
microamperes, is provided in the return circuit from the detector to the power 
supply.  A range switch is provided to shunt the meter so that full scale can also 
correspond either to 150 or 500 microamperes, or to 1.5 or 5 milliamperes.  A 
1000-ohm multi turn potentiometer and precision shunts in series with the meter 
provide outputs to the recorder and plant computer.  The full current output can 
also be supplied temporarily to an external picoammeter for special low current 
measurements.   
 
9. Recorders - Strip-chart recorders are provided for each detector.  The chart 
speed is synchronized with the low speed of the drive motors so that one inch of 
chart movement corresponds to 10-inch movements of the detectors.  Each 
recorder is started automatically by the associated SCAN or RECORD 
pushbuttons, or can also be started at any other time by using the manual start 
switch. 
 
10. Special Low Signal Level Equipment - A picoammeter is provided for making 
special low level measurements when the detector currents are less than five 
microamperes.  The external connectors at the rear of all detector readout 
chassis are connected in parallel by coaxial cables to the input of the 
picoammeter.  Input to the picoammeter is individually selected by switches on 
the detector readout panels.  Also, in case the rectifier power supplies are too 
noisy for very low level signals, a special low-noise battery supply is provided. 
 
  
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -10 Rev 0404 
9.2.3.7 Gas Purge System  
 
The gas purge system, as shown in Figure 9.2-10, consists of a source of dry CO
2 
gas which is introduced into the thimble runs whenever the movable detectors are 
being withdrawn from the reactor core.  In order to do this, the transfer devices are 
contained in metallic enclosures and the gas is allowed to flow into these enclosures 
whenever the detectors are being withdrawn. 
 
A pressure regulator and a throttling valve (a Hoke flow gage) are mounted near the 
10-path transfer devices.  A normally-closed ac solenoid operated off-on valve is 
located at the outlet of the throttling valve, which is electrically opened whenever a 
RECORD or WITHDRAW operation is called for on any of the detector drive motors. 
Stainless steel tubing connects the gas source to the enclosures through the valves. 
(The inlet gas tubing is disconnected when the transfer device’s assembly is moved 
aside during refueling.) 
 
These enclosures are designed to withstand an internal pressure of 1.0 psig without 
damage.  The system is sufficiently leak-tight so that with an internal gas pressure of 
0.02 inch of water applied, the total gas leakage rate will not exceed 15.0 cubic feet 
per hour. 
 
9.2.3.8 Leak Detection System  
 
The leak detection system comprises of; a drain header, a liquid level actuated 
pressure switch, and a 1/4-inch ac solenoid-operated valve, as shown in Figure 9.2-
10.  The inlet connection to the drain header is made at the 10-path transfer device 
enclosure, while the outlet connection is made to the plant drain system. 
 
If water leaks from any of the transfer devices, it enters the leak detection system 
causing the level to rise.  When the pressure switch actuates, it energizes the leak 
alarm and the 1/4-inch solenoid valve.  The alarm is acknowledged by pressing the 
reset pushbutton, which silences the audible alarm and seals in the alarm light.  
When the water level in the drain header decreases below the level actuating 
pressure switch setpoint, its contact opens, de-energizing the solenoid drain valve 
and the alarm light.  The drain line is disconnected during refueling preparations. 
 
9.2.3.9 Thermocouples  
 
Sixty-five chromel-alumel thermocouples are provided for a four-loop plant.  Each 
thermocouple is 1/8 inch (nominal) in diameter, stainless steel sheathed, and 
aluminum oxide insulated, with the trailing end terminated in a male thermocouple 
connector. Each thermocouple is supplied to the specific length required for its 
assigned location. 
 
9.2.3.10 Thermocouple Re ference Junction Box 
 
Two thermocouple junction boxes are provided to permit transition from chromel-
alumel thermocouple extension wiring to copper field wiring.  These units provide a 
controlled 160°F temperature reference for the incore thermocouples.  Each 
reference junction box contains three platinum resistance temperature detectors 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -11 Rev 0404 
(RTD).  Two of the RTDs from each unit are connected directly to the plant 
computer for monitoring of reference junction temperature.  The third RTD in each 
unit is an installed spare. 
 
9.2.3.11 Thermocouple Indicator  
 
One indicator is mounted in the flux mapping control console to provide backup 
readout capability (normal is via the plant computer).  This instrument is supplied 
with a double range measuring circuit which permits measurement within the ranges 
of 100°F to 400°F or 400°F to 700°F.  Selection of a single thermocouple to be 
indicated is made by nonlocking toggle switches on the front of the indicating panel. 
 The toggle switch must be manually held in position (left or right) to monitor the 
desired thermocouple.  The switch returns to the center position (neutral position) 
when released.  Since the thermocouple input signal to the indicator is in parallel 
with the plant computer, a contact closure signal is provided to inform the computer 
when any thermocouple is being monitored by the indicator. 
 
 
9.2.4 Operation and System Interrelationships  
 
9.2.4.1 Detector Calibration  
 
When using the movable incore detectors, the power supply voltages are set near 
the predicted centers of the plateau regions.  The range switches are set at the 
expected ranges for on scale readings and the selector switch is in the RECORDER 
position.  The following sequence of operations is typically performed: 
 
1. Select one of the detectors and run it into the calibration path by placing its five-
path operation selector switch in the CALIBRATE position and using the INSERT 
and SCAN pushbuttons.  During the scan, set the range switch so that the peak 
output is between one-third and full scale.   
 
2. After reaching the top-of-core, use manual control to withdraw the detector 
downward.  Stop at or near the point of highest detector output.  Take data of 
voltage versus meter readings for a saturation curve in 10-volt steps from 20 to 
160 volts.  Plot these readings on linear graph paper or run the strip chart for this 
plot.  Select and set the voltage that will provide operation near the center of the 
plateau region.   
 
3. Repeat this procedure for the remaining detectors and normalize each detector’s 
output voltage to provide consistent readings from detector to detector. 
 
9.2.4.2 Flux-Mapping Procedure  
 
After detector calibrations are performed, full or partial core flux maps are typically 
made in the following semiautomatic steps:  
 
1. Turn one or more operation selector switches to the NORMAL position and 
observe the green light indication.  Select the desired individual paths with the 
ten-path selector switches.  During the flux mapping operation, record the reactor 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -12 Rev 0404 
core power level to insure that measurement conditions are stable during the 
mapping procedure.  
 
2. On the common control panel, turn the mode switch to the AUTO position.  In 
this mode, the speed is determined automatically as described below.  (An 
override can be made by turning the mode switch to MANUAL, which causes all 
manually controlled movements to be at the speed selected by the speed 
switch.) 
 
3. Turn the computer switch to the ON position to log the flux-mapping data in the 
computer.  Select the desired operation on the drive selector switch.  The ALL 
position is normally selected to simultaneously insert all detectors.  Note that the 
operation selector switch of the desired drive(s) unit must be in the NORMAL 
position to obtain flux mapping data from its respective ten-path transfer device.   
 
4. Press the INSERT pushbutton momentarily.  The detectors will be driven at high 
speed to the preselected bottom-of-core position and stopped automatically, as 
indicated by the position indicator digital displays.  When the detectors pass 
through the path indicator switches, contact-closure signals are fed back to the 
path display panel.   
 
5. Press the SCAN pushbutton momentarily.  The detectors will be driven at slow 
speed to the top-of-core and stopped automatically as indicated by the digital 
displays.  During this scan, the recorder is automatically started and a 
continuous readout of the flux profile is obtained as a function of core height.  
This serves as a permanent record of the measurement.  At this time, observe 
the current level and recorder response and make all necessary scale changes 
and adjustments.  
 
6. Press the RECORD pushbutton momentarily.  The detectors will be withdrawn at 
slow speed downward through the core and a contact-closure signal will be 
supplied to the plant computer to indicate that the readouts should be logged.  
The associated strip-chart recorder automatically starts and again will provide a 
flux profile as a function of core height.  The detectors stop automatically at the 
bottom of the core.  During the record operation, the flux profile data is 
transmitted to the plant computer further data reduction and evaluation.   
 
7. Press the WITHDRAW pushbutton. The detectors will be withdrawn at high 
speed back to the withdrawal limit switches as indicated by the digital displays.  
Repeat the above steps for the other paths to give a full or partial core map, 
including running all detectors in the calibration path for normalization. 
 
9.2.4.3 Incore-Excore Calibration  
 
The movable incore neutron flux detectors (incore detectors), in conjunction with the 
plant computer (INCORE Code) present a true representation of the actual neutron 
flux distribution within the reactor core.  Meanwhile, the excore nuclear instruments 
(excore detectors) rely upon leakage neutrons to determine the flux distribution 
within the core.  Due to the distance and shielding between the reactor core and the 
excore detectors, these detectors cannot provide a true representation of the flux 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -13 Rev 0404 
distribution within the core.  Since the excore detectors provide reactor protection 
signals and also provide the reactor operator with continuously monitored indication 
of power and flux distributions within the core, it is necessary to calibrate the excore 
detectors.  
 
Recall from Section 9.1(Excore Nuclear Instrumentation) that the excore power 
range instruments consist of two six-foot detectors (one upper detector and one 
lower detector) per power range instrument channel.  In theory the upper detector 
should indicate the power in the upper six feet of the core while the lower detector 
indicates the power in the lower half of the core.  In practice, however, this is not the 
case, as neutrons leaking from the core do not necessarily leak out of the core at 90 
degree angles.  Some of the leakage neutrons generated in the lower half of the 
core will be detected by the upper detector and conversely the lower detector will 
indicate neutrons that were produced in the upper half of the core.  Since the core 
must be protected from departure from nucleate boiling (DNB) and excessive power 
generation in both the upper and lower halves of the core, it is essential that the 
inputs to the protective circuitry be reflective of the actual conditions in the core.  
This protection is provided by trip signals generated from the overtemperature ΔT 
trip circuitry (OTΔT) and the overpower ΔT trip circuitry (OPΔT) of which both circuits 
receive axial flux difference (AFD) inputs from the excore power range detectors.    
  
The outputs of the upper and lower excore detectors are calibrated to the incore 
detectors at the beginning of each fuel cycle and when the monthly surveillance 
shows a significant difference between the adjusted excore AFD and the incore 
AFD.  AFD is defined as the flux at the top of the core minus the flux at the bottom 
of the core divided by the flux at the top of the core plus the flux at the bottom of the 
core at 100% power.  This calibration must demonstrate the linear relationship that 
should exist between the incore and the excore outputs.  Electronically the AFD is 
expressed in terms of difference in current (ΔI) between the upper and lower excore 
detectors.  The slope of that relationship is used to calibrate the following: the F
1(ΔI) 
penalty to the (OTΔT) trip setpoint in the reactor protection system, the F2(ΔI) 
penalty to the (OPΔT) trip setpoint in the reactor protection system, the AFD meters 
on the control board, the output to the detector current comparators, and the AFD 
monitor program in the plant computer. 
 
In order to establish the existence of a linear relationship between the incore and 
excore detector outputs, an adequate number of data points (different flux 
distributions) must be obtained.  This is accomplished by inducing an axial xenon 
transient, which causes an axial flux oscillation.  During this induced transient, 
incore and excore measurements are obtained.  These measurements are used to 
calculate the equation for the line that best fits the data by using linear regression.  
The incore measurements are taken by performing full core and quarter core flux 
maps at various times during the xenon transient.  Each time an incore AFD is 
obtained by a flux map, all power range excore detector currents are recorded. 
 
The current output from the excore detectors is then plotted against the incore AFD. 
After the linear relationship between the two detector systems is established, the 
gains of the excore detector isolation amplifiers are adjusted.   Adjusting the gain on 
an isolation amplifier only affects its output signal to the reactor protection system, 
the detector current comparators, and the various AFD meters and recorders.  This 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -14 Rev 0404 
adjustment has no effect on the raw current transmitted from the associated excore 
detector, which in addition to supplying the isolation amplifier also provides an input 
to the summing and level amplifier.  Once made, the adjustment to the isolation 
amplifier gain is such that when there is an actual 0% incore delta flux, the excore 
detectors will indicate 0% AFD.  
 
9.2.4.4 Computer 
 
In addition to the strip chart records, on-line computers are installed to provide gross 
analyses of current core conditions for use on a complementary basis with other on-
line monitoring systems. 
 
9.2.4.5 Incore Data Collection  
 
Signal Inputs - A number of active signals are supplied from the flux mapping 
system to the on-line computer.  First, there are analog signals proportional to flux 
levels as measured by the movable detectors.  Second, there are three sets of 
contact closure signals from each detector position control - one to show selection 
of detectors, another set to show the group 5-path transfer position, and a third set 
to show the individual 10-path transfer position.  The latter two automatically indicate 
the flux thimble being measured.  Finally, there are three interrupt signals, 
COMPUTER OFF-ON, SCAN, and RECORD. 
 
SCAN and RECORD Programs - The on-line measurements provide an accurate 
method of determining a three-dimensional power distribution of the reactor core at 
periodic intervals in order to evaluate current core performance.  The SCAN 
interrupt is received when the movable detector drive mechanism is energized to 
drive the selected detectors to the top of the core.  However, data collection 
commences only after the RECORD interrupt is received when the movable detector 
drive mechanism is energized to withdraw the previously inserted detectors from the 
top of the core.   
 
The objective of the on-line rapid data collection is to provide a high priority scheme 
by which all pertinent flux mapping data are collected for later reduction either on an 
offsite basis or for low priority reduction by the plant computer.  Also, on-line priority 
data reduction provides a gross analysis of current core conditions immediately for 
use on a comparative basis with other on-line monitoring systems such as incore 
thermocouples, and excore detectors.   
 
Signal Quality Checks - The program also includes provisions to evaluate the quality 
of the data as the measurement is taken.  Briefly, there are two main quality checks 
made.  For each data point on a pass, three consecutive readings are made 
(maximum 1/15 second apart).  Also, each data point is compared with the 
preceding and succeeding data points, although relatively large variations are 
normal at the core grid locations. 
 
Normalization - In order to provide a consistent set of measured relative reaction 
rates, it is important that all flux mapping data be normalized to one reference 
condition.  Discrepancies which affect measurement results and must be corrected 
for are:  
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -15 Rev 0404 
1. Reactor power drift during the flux mapping period, 
 
2. Dissimilarities between the individual movable detectors, 
 
3. Different readout scale settings, and 
 
4. Leakage current in the detector, normally at low power levels. 
 
During each pass, the total reactor power must be known in order to provide a 
means of converting each pass to one common reactor power level.  This is 
accomplished by integrating the total output from the excore nuclear power channels 
during each pass.  Changes in subsequent excore readings after the first pass 
provide correction ratios for subsequent passes.  
 
In order to establish the normalization factors associated with each detector, it is 
necessary to insert each detector into a common thimble location.  Differences 
between range settings are accounted for by multiplying each detector output by its 
appropriate range setting.  Leakage current correction is made by subtracting from 
the appropriate detector output. 
 
After the data is collected by the computer, it can be processed to provide a full-core 
flux map.  By using the symmetry of the core (attained by fuel and poison loading), 
the data from the selected core locations can be extrapolated to include all fuel 
assemblies in the core.  This may be accomplished by the plant computer, or a 
more powerful offsite computer. 
 
Thermocouple Input - Use of the on-line computer is the normal means for recording 
thermocouple readings.  The thermocouple signals originating above the core pass 
through reference junctions in the plant containment and then to terminal strips in 
the flux-mapping console.  From there, they are paralleled with one set going to the 
computer and the other to a precision indicator with manual selector switches.  The 
latter are intended for use in case of a malfunction of the computer. 
 
Computations Based on Thermocouples - The information received from the 
thermocouples complements the movable detector system by providing periodic on-
line checks on reactor core conditions.  Calibrations of the thermocouples and the 
thermocouple reference junctions are made from tests at known thermal core and 
system conditions.   
 
Computations are made periodically of the enthalpy rise at each thermocouple 
location, relative fuel assembly powers and core radial tilting factors.  Printouts are 
made of alarm messages when any of the relative fuel assembly power values or 
incore thermocouple-based radial tilting factors exceeds established limits.  A listing 
of averaged incore thermocouple readings and fuel assembly power values is made 
for reference usage.  Complete core maps and daily thermocouple history are made 
when requested by the operator. 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -16 Rev 0404 
9.2.5 Summary  
 
Miniature fission chamber detectors can be remotely positioned in retractable guide 
thimbles to provide flux mapping of the core.  The detector is welded to the leading 
end of a helical wrap drive cable and to a sheathed coaxial instrumentation cable.  
The retractable guide thimbles are closed at their leading ends, and serve as the 
pressure boundary between reactor coolant pressure and atmosphere.   
 
The drive assemblies are motor operated, with a hobbed wheel engaging the helical 
drive cable, a take-up reel and position encoders.  The five-path rotary transfer 
device is used to select the mode of operation (normal, calibrate, storage, etc.).  A 
five-path rotary transfer device is provided for each detector-drive assembly.  A ten-
path transfer device is supplied for each detector-drive assembly and is used to 
route a detector into any one of up to ten preselectable fuel assemblies.   
 
Flux mapping consists of a moving detector scan of each provided core location 
(Figure 9.2-11).  The information obtained is collected by the plant computer, which 
will either directly analyze the data obtained or record it for analysis by more 
sophisticated offsite computers. 
 
Thermocouples are provided to give rough approximations of core conditions.  They 
have the advantage of being on-line and are immediately available to the operator.  
The thermocouples are inserted into guide tubes that penetrate the reactor vessel 
head and terminate at the flow exits just above the fuel assemblies.  Thermocouple 
readings are monitored by the computer with backup readout at a manual point 
selection. 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 9.2 -17 Rev 0404 
Table 9.2-1 
Movable Detector Design Parameters 
 
Movable Detectors  
  
4-loop plants, number 6 
3-loop plants, number 5 
2-loop plants, number 4 
Outside diameter, in. 0.199 
Length, in. 2.1 
  
Performance Data  
  
Cable speed (low), ft/min 12 
Cable speed (high), ft/min 72 
Position indication, in. 0.5 
  
Flux Thimbles  
4-loop plants, number 58 
3-loop plants, number 50 
2-loop plants, number 36 
Nominal O.D., in. 0.300 
Nominal I.D., in. 0.199 
 
 
 
 
Table 9.2-2 
Thermocouple Design Parameters 
 
4-loop plants, number 65 
3-loop plants, number 51 
2-loop plants, number 39 
Outside diameter, in. 0.111 
Type Chromel-alumel 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
