 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 5.0 
 
Introduction to Engineered Safety Features
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-i Rev 1208 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
5.0 INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEER ED SAFETY FEATURES ......................... 5.0-1 
 
5.0.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 5.0-1 
 
5.0.1.1 LOCA Description .................................................................. 5.0-2 
5.0.1.2 Emergency Core Cooling Systems ........................................ 5.0-3 
5.0.1.3 Containment Barrier Protection ............................................. 5.0-4 
5.0.1.4 Decay Heat Removal ............................................................ 5.0-4 
 
5.0.2 Terms ................................................................................................. 5.0-5 
 
5.0.2.1 Redundanc y .......................................................................... 5.0-5 
5.0.2.2 Physical and Electr ical Separation ........................................ 5.0-5 
5.0.2.3 Regulatory Terms Associated With Safety ............................ 5.0-5 
5.0.2.4 Seismic Category I ................................................................ 5.0-6 
5.0.2.5 Diversity ................................................................................. 5.0-6 
5.0.2.6 Single Failure (Active/Passive) .............................................. 5.0-6 
 
5.0.3 General Design Requirements ........................................................... 5.0-7 
 
5.0.3.1 Failure Criteria ....................................................................... 5.0-7 
5.0.3.2 ESF Train .............................................................................. 5.0-8 
5.0.3.3 Typical Engineered Safety Feature Systems ........................ 5.0-8 
5.0.3.4 Design Categories or Conditions of Operation ...................... 5.0-9 
5.0.3.5 Acceptance Criteria for the ECCS (10 CFR 50.46) ............. 5.0-11 
5.0.3.6 Engineered Safety Features Actuation Signals ................... 5.0-12 
 
5.0.4 Typical Analysis Limi ts and Assumptions ......................................... 5.0-12 
 
5.0.4.1 Steam Line Break Accident Analysis ................................... 5.0-13 
5.0.4.2 Assumptions for Steam Line Break Analysis ....................... 5.0-13 
5.0.4.3 Systems Which Provide Protection Against Steam Line 
Break Accidents .................................................................. 5.0-14 
 
5.0.5 Summary  .......................................................................................... 5.0-15 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
5.0-1 ................................. Steam Line Break Downstream of Flow Measuring Nozzle 
5.0-2 ..................................................... Steam Line Break at Exit of Steam Generator 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-1 Rev 1208 
5.0  INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERED SAFETY FEATURES  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. State the purposes of the Engineered Safety Feature (ESF) Systems. 
 
2. Identify the three barriers designed to limit the escape of fission products to the 
environment. 
 
3. Explain the following terms: 
 
a. Redundancy 
b. Physical and electrical separation 
c. Regulatory terms associated with safety: 
 
$ Important to safety 
$ Safety related 
$ Safety grade 
 
d. Seismic Category I 
e. Diversity 
f. Single failure 
g. Active failure 
h. Passive failure 
i. ESF train 
 
4. List the four design categories or conditions of operation, and give an example of 
each. 
 
5. List the five acceptance criteria for the Emergency Core Cooling Systems 
(ECCSs). 
 
 
5.0.1 Introduction  
 
In a large nuclear generating station with a core output rated at over 3,000 MW 
thermal, about 6 pounds of fission products are produced each day the unit is 
operated at full power.  To protect the public from these fission products, a multiple 
barrier concept is incorporated into the design of the plant. 
 
The first barrier consists of an enclosed cylindrical cladding that surrounds the fuel 
pellets and is designed to contain the fission products. 
 
The second barrier is the reactor coolant system (RCS) pressure boundary.  This 
barrier is designed to withstand high pressures and temperatures.  The thickness of 
this barrier varies from a few inches for the reactor coolant loop piping, about 8 
inches for the reactor vessel walls, and about one-tenth of an inch for the steam 
generator U-tubes.  Since the RCS pressure boundary surrounds the first barrier, it 
will contain any fission products that escape from the cladding. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-2 Rev 1208 
The final barrier of protection is the containment (reactor building).  Many approved 
designs are used, but all contain the reactor coolant system and provide a third 
barrier to the release of radioactivity to the public. 
 
The three barriers and the protection against the loss of each barrier is required by 
the Code of Federal Regulations.  The reactor trips based on avoiding departure 
from nucleate boiling (DNB) and excessive local power densities (kw/ft.) are installed 
to protect the first barrier (fuel cladding) from damage.  The high pressure reactor 
trip and the pressurizer code safety valves provide protection for the second barrier 
(RCS) by limiting the pressure in the RCS to less than its design pressure.  Finally, 
the design of the containment, its support systems, and allowable leakage 
specifications help to insure the integrity of the containment. 
 
5.0.1.1 LOCA Description  
 
Consider the effect on the fuel cladding and the containment if a gross failure of the 
reactor coolant system occurs without the benefit of the engineered safety features. 
When a loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) occurs, hot pressurized reactor coolant is 
forced out of the reactor coolant system, and pressure in the RCS rapidly 
decreases.  An automatic reactor shutdown occurs because of this decrease in 
pressure and the control rods drop into the core.  The fission process in the core is 
all but stopped and heat production drops to the decay heat value.  As the coolant 
rapidly escapes via the break, containment temperature and pressure begin to 
increase.  In a short time the reactor coolant system has flashed to steam and the 
pressure has equalized with the pressure inside the containment.  At this time the 
blowdown phase of the loss of coolant accident has ended. 
 
The fuel cladding begins to heat up following the blowdown phase of the accident.  
When the cladding temperatures exceed 2200°F, a zirconium-water reaction starts 
to occur.  The hydrogen produced from this chemical reaction escapes into the 
containment, and the exothermic reaction causes an extra heat input into the 
cladding.  The extreme pellet temperatures cause increased fuel rod pressures and 
the weakened cladding begins to bow.  As the zirconium-water reaction continues, 
the zircalloy cladding begins to undergo metallurgical changes and becomes brittle, 
adding to its destruction. 
 
As a result of the cladding degradation, fission products are released from the 
reactor coolant system to the containment through the RCS break.  Two of the three 
barriers have now failed, and the third barrier is threatened.  The containment pres-
sure has increased due to the blowdown phase and will cause the escape of fission 
products to the environment through minute leakage paths.  For some plant 
designs, the potential for a gross failure of the containment due to a hydrogen 
explosion is of great concern.  For others the continuous heat input into the 
containment can cause the pressure and temperature to increase to the point where 
the containment could rupture. 
 
However, the engineered safety feature systems are installed in nuclear units to 
mitigate the consequences of the loss of the reactor coolant system pressure 
boundary.  Among these systems are the emergency core cooling systems, which 
are actuated automatically during accident situations. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-3 Rev 1208 
When a safety injection actuation signal is generated, borated water is pumped from 
the refueling water storage tank to the reactor coolant system, and the reactor 
vessel is refilled.  This reflooding of the core from the refueling water storage tank is 
called the injection phase of the LOCA.  With a flow of water into the core, decay 
heat is removed and the fission product release due to cladding failure is minimized. 
Consider the following major issues concerning the ECCSs. 
 
First, if only one pump is installed and it fails, the consequences of a LOCA are the 
same as those previously discussed.  But if a redundant pump that is also capable 
of supplying 100% of the required core cooling is installed, then the public can be 
protected.  General Design Criterion (GDC) 35 of 10 CFR 50, Appendix A, requires 
redundant emergency core cooling systems. 
 
Next, if only one sensor is used to actuate the ECCS, and it fails in a 
nonconservative direction, the core will not be reflooded, regardless of the number 
of ECCS pumps installed.  If the sensor fails in the conservative direction, then an 
unnecessary actuation of ECCS equipment would occur.  Therefore, IEEE-279 
requires that redundant sensors, as well as redundant instrument strings, logic 
devices, and actuating devices, be installed. 
 
After providing protection for the first two contingencies as stated above, a loss of 
power to the emergency core cooling system pumps must be considered.  The 
normal power supplies to the pump motors come from the electrical grid by way of 
transformers, breakers, and buswork.  Because this distribution system is vulnerable 
to thunderstorms, tornadoes, hurricanes, icing, and other acts of nature; a standby 
(emergency) power system is provided to ensure a power supply to the ECCS pump 
motors. 
  
Redundant diesel generators are normally used as the standby power supply.  GDC 
17 of 10 CFR 50, Appendix A, outlines the requirements for electrical power 
distribution. 
 
Finally, the emergency equipment must be designed to remain operational during a 
postulated seismic event.  Paraphrasing 10 CFR 100, nuclear plant components 
designated to prevent or mitigate the consequences of accidents must be designed 
and built to remain functional during the design basis earthquake.  Components 
satisfying this requirement are designated Seismic Category I. 
 
In summary, the emergency core cooling systems must be redundant, actuated by 
redundant sensors, powered from redundant electrical power sources, and designed 
to be operational during seismic events. 
 
5.0.1.2 Emergency Core Cooling Systems  
 
Certain systems are installed to provide emergency cooling to the core in the event 
of a LOCA.  These systems include the high, intermediate, and low pressure 
injection systems, and the cold leg accumulators . 
 
The high pressure injection system, consisting of two redundant trains, provides 
protection for small-break LOCAs (SBLOCAs).  This system pumps water from the 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-4 Rev 1208 
refueling water storage tank (RWST) into the RCS cold legs during the injection 
phase.  The high pressure system can also be used during the recirculation phase 
by connecting its suction to the residual heat removal system.  In addition, this 
system injects boric acid from the RWST into the RCS during steam break accidents 
to offset the positive reactivity added by the rapid cooldown of the RCS. 
 
The intermediate pressure injection system (safety injection system), provides 
protection for small to intermediate sized loss of coolant accidents.  It has a greater 
capacity than the high pressure injection system but less than the low pressure 
injection system.  Both safety injection system trains take suction from the RWST 
during the injection phase of the accident.  Like the high pressure injection system, it 
can also be used during the recirculation phase by connecting its suction to the 
residual heat removal system. 
 
The low pressure injection system (residual heat removal system) provides 
protection for a large loss of coolant accident.  This system consists of two trains 
which can pump at a high rate of flow and at a low pressure from the RWST to the 
reactor coolant system.  These pumps are also supplied with suction from the 
containment emergency core cooling recirculation sump.  This suction source will be 
used during the recirculation phase of the accident.  In addition to supplying cooling 
water to the reactor vessel, these pumps can also supply the suctions of the 
intermediate and high pressure injection systems. 
 
The cold leg accumulators consists of four tanks filled with borated water and 
pressurized with nitrogen.  When the RCS is pressurized and the reactor is at 
power, check valves, held closed by the higher reactor coolant system pressure, 
prevent the entry of water from the accumulators into the reactor coolant system.  
However, if a loss of coolant accident results in a reactor coolant system pressure 
lower than the pressure in the accumulators, then borated water will flow from the 
accumulators to the reactor vessel, via the cold legs.  This system, unlike the high, 
intermediate, and low pressure injection systems, requires no actuation signal. 
 
In addition to emergency core cooling systems, the engineered safety features 
design includes provisions to protect the containment barrier and to remove the core 
decay heat (auxiliary feedwater system). 
 
5.0.1.3 Containment Barrier Protection  
 
The containment spray system is installed to reduce the pressure inside the 
containment following a loss of coolant accident or a steam line break within the 
confines of the containment.  The containment spray system satisfies the same 
design requirements as the emergency core cooling system.  In addition to the 
containment spray system, other methods of controlling the containment pressure 
include containment fan coolers and hydrogen recombiners. 
 
5.0.1.4 Decay Heat Removal 
 
When the reactor trips, the rapid insertion of the control rods stops the heat 
production from the fission process.  However, the heat production from fission 
product decay continues.  This decay heat is normally removed by converting 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-5 Rev 1208 
feedwater to steam in the steam generators.  The main feedwater system does not 
meet safety system design criteria and if it is lost, the steam generators will boil dry. 
When the secondary inventory is lost, the decay heat will not be removed from the 
core.  As the fission product decay continues, the resultant heat production causes 
an increase in reactor coolant temperature and a corresponding increase in RCS 
pressure.  If left unchecked, the temperature and pressure increases will result in a 
challenge to the reactor coolant system pressure boundary. 
 
The auxiliary feedwater system is designed to provide feedwater to the steam 
generators to remove decay heat in the event of a loss of main feedwater.  The 
auxiliary feedwater system meets the same design criteria as the emergency core 
cooling system. 
 
The emergency systems installed to mitigate the consequences of accidents are 
among the most important systems in the nuclear plant.  Normally these systems 
are aligned for the injection phase.  However, if the safety system is in use 
performing one of its non-safety functions, it will be automatically re-aligned to 
perform its safety function upon receipt of an engineered safety features actuation 
signal. 
 
 
5.0.2 Terms  
 
5.0.2.1 Redundancy  
 
If a component such as a pump is installed to provide a safety function, a second 
100% backup pump must also be installed.  This convention is known as 
redundancy.  Redundant instrument sensors, instrument strings, and logic devices 
are required to ensure that no single failure will prevent at least one of these 
components from performing their intended function. 
 
5.0.2.2 Physical and Electrical Separation  
 
All engineered safety feature systems must be physically separated so that a 
catastrophic failure of one system will not prevent another engineered safety feature 
system from performing its intended function.  Electrical power to the engineered 
safety features comes from the transmission grid via transformers, breakers and bus 
work.  Because this distribution system is vulnerable to thunderstorms, hurricanes, 
icing, and other acts of nature, a standby power system is provided to insure a 
reliable source of power.  Redundant diesel generators are normally used for this 
standby power supply.  These standby power supplies are normally arranged into 
redundant trains (typically Train A and Train B), which provide power to separate 
trains of redundant safety features. 
 
5.0.2.3 Regulatory Terms Associated With Safety  
 
1. Important to safety - Those structures, systems, and components that provide 
reasonable assurance that the facility can be operated without undue risk to the 
health and safety of the public.  This encompasses the broad class of plant 
features that contribute in an important way to the safe operation and protection 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-6 Rev 1208 
of the public in all phases and aspects of facility operations.  This includes 
“safety grade” or “safety related” as a subset. 
 
2. Safety related - Those structures, systems, or components designed to remain 
functional during a safe shutdown earthquake (SSE) and are necessary to 
assure: 
 
a. The integrity of the reactor coolant system pressure boundary, 
b. The capability to shut down the reactor and maintain it in a safe shutdown 
condition, or 
c. The capability to prevent or mitiga te the consequences of accidents which 
could result in potential off-site exposures comparable to the guidelines in 
10CFR 100, Appendix A. 
 
3. Safety grade - This term is not explicitly used in regulations.  It is equivalent to 
“safety related,” and is a subset of “important to safety.” 
 
5.0.2.4 Seismic Category I  
 
Those structures, systems, and components, including their foundations and 
supports, designed to remain functional if the safe shutdown earthquake occurs 
have been designated as Seismic Category I. 
 
The following constitutes the systems and components designated as Seismic 
Category I. 
 
1. The reactor coolant pressure boundary, 
2. The reactor core and vessel internals, and 
3. Systems or portions of systems that are required for emergency core cooling, 
post-accident containment heat removal, and post accident containment 
atmosphere cleanup. 
 
Seismic Category I design requirements extend to the first seismic restraint beyond 
the identified boundaries. 
 
5.0.2.5 Diversity 
 
Diversity refers to different methods of providing the same safety protection or 
function.  An example of this is the containment fan cooler system and the 
containment spray system.  Both of these systems are designed to lower the 
pressure inside the containment following a steam break or a loss of coolant 
accident inside the containment.  
 
5.0.2.6 Single Failure (Active/Passive)  
 
A “single failure” is an occurrence which results in the loss of capability of a 
component to perform its intended safety function when called upon.  Multiple 
failures resulting from a single occurrence are to be considered as a single failure.  
Fluid process systems are considered to be designed to withstand an assumed 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-7 Rev 1208 
single failure if neither a single active nor a single passive failure results in a loss of 
the safety function to the nuclear unit. 
 
An “active failure” is a malfunction, excluding passive failures, of a component which 
relies on mechanical movement to complete its intended function on demand.  
Examples of active failures include the failure of a powered valve or a check valve to 
move to its correct position, or the failure of a pump, fan, or diesel generator to start. 
 
Spurious action of a powered component originating within its actuation system shall 
be regarded as an active failure unless specific design features or operating 
restrictions preclude such spurious actions. 
 
A “passive failure” is a breech of a fluid pressure boundary or blockage of a process 
flow path. 
 
The design flow limit for a passive failure (i.e., flow from a pressure boundary breech 
or flow through the blockage of a process flow path) is analyzed by the utility.  This 
is done by performing an analysis of passive failures in the system, considering 
conditions of operation and possible failure or leakage modes as appropriate.  For 
example, a review of a system that contains piping, heat exchangers, valves, 
flanged joints, and system interface barriers might result in the definition of a design 
leak rate for passive failure in that system based on the maximum flow through a 
failed packing or mechanical seal rather than complete severance of the piping. 
 
In lieu of this analysis, the designer must consider complete severance of the piping 
and an independently complete blockage of the process path as a passive failure. 
 
 
5.0.3 General Design Requirements  
 
The engineered safety feature systems are provided in nuclear power plants to 
mitigate the consequences of reactor plant accidents.  Sections of the General 
Design Criteria (refer to Chapter 1.1) require the installation of specific ESF 
systems.  Containment systems, the residual heat removal (RHR) system, 
emergency core cooling systems, containment heat removal systems, containment 
atmospheric cleanup systems and certain cooling water systems are typical of the 
systems required to be provided as ESF systems.  Each of the ESF systems is 
designed to withstand a single failure without loss of its protective function 
capabilities during or following an accident condition. 
 
5.0.3.1 Failure Criteria  
 
The ESF systems are designed to withstand any single failure without loss of core 
and containment protection.  However, this single failure is limited to either an active 
failure during the injection phase (a short period of time until the RWST empties) 
following an accident, or an active or a passive failure during the recirculation phase 
(a long period of time when water is taken from the containment recirculation sump, 
cooled by the RHR heat exchangers and pumped back into the RCS).  
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-8 Rev 1208 
Most accidents are analyzed assuming a loss of off-site power conditions.  This loss 
of off-site power is considered in addition the Asingle active failure.@ 
 
5.0.3.2 ESF Train  
 
The engineered safety features which contain active components are designed with 
two independent trains.  This convention is illustrated by the ECCSs, of which either 
train can satisfy all the requirements to safely shut down the plant or meet the final 
acceptance criteria following an accident.  
 
The Technical Specifications state that one ECCS train consists of: 
 
1. One centrifugal charging pump, 
2. One safety injection pump, 
3. One RHR pump, 
4. An operable flow path from the RWST to the RCS and from the containment 
sump back to the RCS, and 
5. Power supplies and instrumentation for the above items. 
 
To guarantee that at least one train of the ECCS is available if an accident occurs, 
both trains must meet the operability requirements in the Technical Specifications 
whenever the temperature of the RCS is above 350EF.  This will allow for the single 
active failure of the emergency power source (diesel generator), and still retain one 
train of ECCS for accident mitigation. 
 
5.0.3.3 Typical Engineered Safety Feature Systems  
 
The typical ESF systems that may be found at a Westinghouse nuclear power plant 
are listed below. 
 
1. Containment - This Seismic Category I building provides a virtually leak-tight 
barrier to prevent the release of fission products to the environment. 
 
2. Containment heat removal systems - These systems, containment spray and 
containment fan coolers, reduce the pressure and temperature inside the 
containment and remove fission products from the containment atmosphere. 
 
3. Containment isolation system – This sy stem provides isolation capability for the 
various lines penetrating the containment.   
 
4. Containment combustible gas control system - The hydrogen recombiners 
control the concentration of hydrogen gas which may be released to the 
containment following an accident to assure containment integrity.  
 
5. Emergency core cooling systems – These systems deliver the borated water 
from the RWST to the core following various postulated accidents. 
 
6. Habitability systems – These systems provide the control room with adequate 
shielding, air purification, and climatic control.  
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-9 Rev 1208 
7. Auxiliary feedwater system – This system provides makeup to the steam 
generators whenever the main feedwater system is not available and thus 
maintains the primary-to-secondary heat removal capability of the steam 
generators.  
 
8. Class 1E electrical system - This vital electrical distribution system, including the 
emergency diesel generators, provides a reliable source of power to the active 
components of the ESF.  
 
9. Essential support systems – These include any system or subsystem 
(component cooling water, essential raw cooling water, etc.) which would be 
required to operate in support of the above systems. 
 
5.0.3.4 Design Categories or Conditions of Operation  
 
Each facility shall, as a condition of licensing, include in its Final Safety Analysis 
Report (FSAR) a section titled “Accident Analysis.”  The requirements for the 
information contained in this section are outlined in 10 CFR 50.34 and are detailed 
in Regulatory Guide 1.70, Standard Format and Content of Safety Analysis Reports. 
This regulatory guide sets up a standard approach to ensure the license applicant 
has analyzed both expected and unexpected transients and accidents, that 
conservative values are applied in the analysis, and that the plant design has 
incorporated an adequate margin of safety. 
 
The accident analysis section of the FSAR shall include the analysis of several 
transients and accidents.  These analyzed incidents are placed in four (4) categories 
or conditions of operation. 
 
Condition I - Normal Operations 
 
Condition I events are those occurrences which are expected to happen frequently 
or regularly in the course of power operation, refueling, maintenance, or changing 
power in the plant.  Therefore, Condition I occurrences are accommodated with a 
margin between any plant parameter and the value of that parameter which would 
require either automatic or manual protective actions.  Since Condition I events 
occur frequently or regularly, they must be considered from the point of view of 
affecting the consequences of fault conditions (Conditions II, III and IV).  In this 
regard, analysis of each fault condition described is generally based on a 
conservative set of initial conditions corresponding to adverse conditions which can 
occur during Condition I operation.  Below is a typical list of Condition I events: 
 
1. Steady state and shutdown operations. 
 
a. Power operation (15-100% of full power) 
b. Start up (or standby) (critical, 0-15% of full power) 
c. Hot shutdown (subcritical, residual heat removal system in operation) 
d. Refueling 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-10 Rev 1208 
2. Operation with permissible deviations - Various deviations which may occur 
during continued operation as permitted by the plant Technical Specifications 
must be considered in conjunction with other operational modes.  These include: 
 
a. Operation with components or systems out of service (such as power 
operation with a reactor coolant pump out of service) 
b. Leakage from fuel with clad defects 
c. Radioactivity in the reactor coolant 
 
$ Fission Products 
$ Corrosion Products 
$ Tritium 
 
d. Operation with steam generator leaks up to the maximum allowed by the 
Technical Specifications 
e. Testing as allowed by the Technical Specifications 
 
3. Operational testing 
 
a. Plant heatup and cooldown (up to 100°F/hour for the RCS; 200°F/hour for the 
pressurizer cooldown only) 
b. Step load changes (up to 10%/minute) 
c. Ramp load changes (up to 5%/minute) 
d. Load rejection up to and including a full load rejection transient 
 
Condition II - Faults of Moderate Frequency 
 
These faults, which are expected to happen on a once-per-year basis and at worst, 
result in a reactor trip with the plant being capable of returning to operations.  By 
definition, these faults (or events) do not propagate to cause a more serious fault, 
i.e., a Condition III or IV event.  In addition, Condition II events are not expected to 
result in fuel rod failures or the over pressurization of the RCS.  The operational 
events that meet the above assumptions have been grouped below: 
 
1. Uncontrolled rod cluster control assembly  bank withdrawal from a subcritical 
condition 
2. Uncontrolled rod cluster control assembly bank withdrawal at power 
3. Rod cluster control assembly misalignment 
4. Uncontrolled boron dilution 
5. Partial loss of forced reactor coolant flow 
6. Start-up of an inactive reactor coolant loop 
7. Loss of external electrical load and/or turbine trip 
8. Loss of normal feedwater 
9. Loss of offsite power to the station auxiliaries. 
10. Excessive heat removal due to feedwater system malfunctions 
11. Excessive load increase incident 
12. Accidental depressurization of the RCS 
13. Accidental depressurization of the main steam system 
14. Inadvertent operation of emergency core cooling system during power operation 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-11 Rev 1208 
Condition III - Infrequent Faults 
 
Condition III occurrences are faults which are expected to happen once in the 40-
year life of the plant.  Such an event would result in the failure of only a small 
fraction of the fuel rods, although sufficient fuel damage might occur to preclude 
resumption of power operations for a considerable outage time.  The release of 
radioactivity will not be sufficient to interrupt or restrict public use of those areas 
beyond the exclusion radius.  A Condition III fault will not, by itself, generate a 
Condition IV fault or result in a consequential loss of function of the reactor coolant 
system or containment barriers.  The following faults have been grouped into this 
category: 
 
1. Loss of reactor coolant from small rupt ured pipes or from cracks in large pipes 
which actuates the emergency core cooling system 
2. Minor secondary pipe breaks 
3. Inadvertent loading of a fuel assembly into an improper position 
4. Complete loss of forced reactor coolant flow 
5. Single rod cluster control assembly withdrawal at full power 
 
Condition IV - Limiting Faults 
 
Condition IV occurrences are faults which are never expected to take place but are 
postulated because the events are so severe that the consequences would include 
the potential for the release of significant amounts of radioactive material.  These 
accidents are the most drastic and therefore represent the limiting design cases.  
Condition IV faults shall not cause a fission product release to the environment 
resulting in an undue risk to public health and safety in excess of the guideline 
values of 10 CFR Part 100.  A single Condition IV fault shall not cause a 
consequential loss of required functions of systems needed to cope with the fault, 
including those of the emergency core cooling system and the containment.  The 
following faults have been classified in this category: 
 
1. Major ruptures of pipes containing reactor coolant up to and including the 
double-ended rupture of the largest pipe in the reactor coolant system (LOCAs) 
2. Major secondary system pipe ruptures 
3. Steam generator tube rupture 
4. Single reactor coolant pump locked rotor 
5. Fuel handling accident 
6. Rupture of a control rod drive mechanism housing (rod cluster control assembly 
ejection) 
 
5.0.3.5 Acceptance Criteria for the Emergency Core Cooling Systems (10      
CFR 50.46) 
 
In 1974, the final acceptance criteria for emergency core cooling systems for light 
water reactors were established.  These criteria require the ECCS to be designed 
and built so that the calculated cooling performance following a full spectrum of 
postulated LOCA=s would meet the following limits during or following the accident. 
 
1. Peak Cladding Temperature (PCT) shall remain less than 2200°F. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-12 Rev 1208 
2. Maximum cladding oxidation shall not exceed 17% of the total cladding 
thickness. 
3. Maximum hydrogen generated by the reaction of water or steam with the 
cladding shall not exceed 1% of the amount that would be generated if all the 
cladding reacted chemically with water or steam. 
4. Coolable geometry - Any changes in core geometry shall be such that the core 
remains in a coolable configuration. 
5. Long-term cooling - Core temperature, after the injection phase, shall be 
maintained at an acceptably low value.  Decay heat shall be removed for the 
extended period of time required. 
 
5.0.3.6 Engineered Safety Features Actuation Signals  
 
Many of the engineered safety feature systems of a facility are actuated by any of 
the safety injection actuation signals, listed below: 
 
1. High steam line flow coincident with low steam line pressure or low-low T
avg. 
2. High steam line differential pressure - One steam line lower in pressure than at 
least two of the remaining three by 100 psid/or more. 
3. Low pressurizer pressure – At least two of four measured pressurizer pressures 
less than setpoint. 
4. High containment pressure – At least two of three measured containment 
pressures greater than setpoint. 
5. Manual – Operation of one of two control board switches. 
 
It should be noted that, with a few exceptions, each safety injection actuation signal 
achieves identical results.  That is, regardless of the protection signal being 
generated, each signal causes the same equipment to be operated. 
 
An additional ESF actuation signal is the containment spray actuation signal, which 
actuates the containment spray system when containment pressure reaches 
approximately half of design pressure. 
 
 
5.0.4 Typical Analysis Limits and Assumptions  
 
For conservatism, each accident that is analyzed assumes the most conservative 
conditions, setpoints, equipment operability, and other factors which could 
conceivably affect the severity of the event.  Listed below are some of the 
assumptions used in the accident analysis. 
 
1. Maximum time delays for reactor trip, safety injection actuation, steam line 
isolation valve closure, etc., are assumed. 
2. Starting values for the various plant parameters will be assumed to be at their 
worst-case conditions. 
3. Plant history, reactivity coefficients and other variables affecting the accident are 
chosen to produce the most severe transient. 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-13 Rev 1208 
5.0.4.1 Steam Line Break Accident Analysis  
 
The steam break accident is outlined here as an example of the goals and concerns 
that are assumed in performing accident analysis. 
 
The analysis is performed to demonstrate that: 
 
1. There is no consequential damage to the primary system and the core remains 
intact. 
2. Energy release for the worst-case break does not cause failure of the 
containment. 
3. There is no return to criticality after the reactor trip for a break equivalent to a 
stuck-open steam bypass, relief, or safety valve. 
 
5.0.4.2 Assumptions for Steam Line Break Analysis 
 
The assumptions used for the steam line break accident are listed as follows: 
 
1. The design end-of-life shut down ma rgin at no-load, equilibrium xenon 
conditions, and with the most reactive rod stuck in its fully withdrawn position. 
 
2. The negative moderator temperature coefficient corresponding to the end-of-life 
rodded core with the most reactive rod in the fully withdrawn position.  The 
variation of the coefficient with temperature and pressure has been included. 
 
3. The minimum capability for injection of concentrated boric acid solution 
corresponding to the most restrictive single active failure in the safety injection 
system.  This corresponds to the flow delivered by one centrifugal charging 
pump delivering its full contents to the cold legs. 
 
4. The design value of the steam generator heat transfer coefficient, including an 
allowance for tube fouling. 
 
5. Hot channel factors corresponding to the worst-case stuck rod at end of core life. 
 
6. Several combinations of break sizes and initial plant conditions have been 
considered in determining the core power transient which can result from large 
area pipe breaks: 
 
a. Complete severance of a pipe downstream of the steam flow restrictor with 
the plant initially at no-load conditions and all reactor coolant pumps running. 
(Figure 5.0-1). 
 
b. Complete severance of a pipe inside the containment at the outlet of the 
steam generator with the same plant conditions as above (Figure 5.0-2). 
 
c. Case (a) above with loss of outside power simultaneous with the generation 
of the safety injection signal (loss of ac power results in coolant pump 
coastdown). 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-14 Rev 1208 
d. Case (b) above with the loss of offsite power simultaneous with the safety 
injection signal.  A fifth case was analyzed consistent with the criterion stated 
earlier that there should be no return to criticality after reactor trip in the event 
of the spurious opening of a steam bypass or relief valve. 
 
e. A break equivalent to a steam flow of 247 lb/sec at 1100 psi from one steam 
generator with offsite power available. 
 
7. Initial hot shutdown conditions were considered for all of the above cases since 
this represents the most pessimistic initial condition for the accident. 
 
8. The containment pressure response was evaluated for case 6.b above, since 
this results in the most severe steam break containment transient.  In addition to 
the full contents of the faulty steam generating unit being delivered to the 
containment, it was also assumed that break flow was delivered from the other 
three steam generators through a failed nonreturn valve in the broken steam line. 
The latter flow continues until the main steam isolation valves close in the intact 
steam lines. 
 
9. Perfect moisture separation in the steam generator is assumed.  This 
assumption leads to conservative results since, in fact, considerable water would 
be discharged.  Water carryover would reduce the magnitude of the temperature 
decrease in the core and the pressure increase in the containment. 
 
5.0.4.3 Systems Which Provide Protection Against Steam Line Break 
Accidents 
 
The following protection signals and plant features mitigate the consequences of a 
main steam line rupture. 
 
1. Safety injection actuation signal (any of the following): 
 
a. High steam line flow 
b. High steam line differential pressure 
c. Low pressurizer pressure 
d. High containment pressure 
 
2. Reactor trip (any of the following): 
 
a. High neutron flux 
b. Overpower ΔT 
c. Safety injection reactor trip 
 
3. Main feedwater isolation signal, generating the following responses: 
 
a. Close feedwater isolation valves 
b. Close feedwater control valves 
c. Close feedwater control bypass valves 
d. Trip main feedwater pumps 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.0-15 Rev 1208 
4. The shutting of the main steam isolation valves and/or the affected generator’s 
main steam check valve prevents the blowdown of more than one steam 
generator for any break location. 
 
5. The steam line flow venturi of the affected steam generator limits break flow. 
 
 
5.0.5 Summary 
 
To protect the public from fission products, multiple barriers of protection are 
incorporated into the design of a commercial pressurized water reactor plant. 
 
If the reactor enters unsafe regions of operation, the reactor protection system will 
generate a reactor trip to protect the cladding and reactor coolant system pressure 
boundary (first two barriers of protection).  If an accident has occurred, such as a 
loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA), the reactor protection system actuates the 
engineered safety feature systems to mitigate the consequences of the accident and 
to protect the containment (third and final barrier of protection).  The engineered 
safety feature systems must be redundant, actuated by redundant sensors and 
instrument strings, physically separated, powered from redundant electrical power 
supplies, and designed to remain operational during seismic events.
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
---PAGE---
