 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 10.1 
 
Reactor Coolant Instrumentation
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-ii Rev 0505 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
10.1 REACTOR COOLANT IN STRUMENTATION .......................................... 10.1-1 
 
10.1.1 Temperat ure ................................................................................ 10.1-1 
 
10.1.1.1 Narrow-Range Temperature Detectors ......................... 10.1-1 
10.1.1.2 Wide-Range Temperature Detectors ............................ 10.1-4 
10.1.1.3 Pressurizer, Surge Line, and Spray Line Temperature 
Detectors ....................................................................... 10.1-4 
10.1.1.4 Safety and Relief Valve Discharge and Pressurizer 
 Relief Tank Temperature Detectors .............................. 10.1-4 
10.1.1.5 Reactor Vessel Flange Leakoff Temperature Detector . 10.1-5 
 
10.1.2 Pressure ....................................................................................... 10.1-5 
 
10.1.2.1 Pressurizer Pressure Detectors..................................... 10.1-5 
10.1.2.2 Reactor Coolant Loop and Pressurizer Relief Tank 
 Pressure Detectors ........................................................ 10.1-5 
 
10.1.3 Pressurizer Level ......................................................................... 10.1-6 
 
10.1.4 Reactor Coolant Flow ................................................................... 10.1-6 
 
10.1.5 Reactor Vessel Level I ndicating System ...................................... 10.1-6 
 
10.1.6 Subcooling Margin Monitoring .................................................... 10.1-10 
 
10.1.7 Summary  .................................................................................... 10.1-12 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
10.1-1a ....................................... RCS Loop Instrumentation (With Bypass Manifolds) 
10.1-1b .................................. RCS Loop Instrumentation (Without Bypass Manifolds) 
10.1-2 .................................................................... RCS Temperature Instrumentation 
10.1-3 ........................................................... Pressurizer and Pressurizer Relief Tank 
10.1-4 ........................................................... Reactor Vessel Level Indication System 
10.1-5 ............................................................... RVLIS Microprocessor Block Diagram 
10.1-6 ................................................................................ Subcooling Margin Monitor 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-1 Rev 0505 
10.1 REACTOR COOLANT INSTRUMENTATION  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. Describe how loop average temperature (T avg) and temperature difference (ΔT) 
are derived from the coolant loop narrow-range resistance temperature detector 
(RTD) outputs, and how these signals are used. 
 
2. List the functions of the following temperature monitors: 
 
a. Reactor coolant system (RCS) wide-range temperature detectors; 
b. Pressurizer, pressurizer surge line, and pressurizer spray line detectors; 
c. Safety and relief valve discharge line detectors; 
d. Pressurizer relief tank (PRT) detector; and 
e. Reactor vessel flange leak-off detector. 
 
3. Explain how the differential pressure ( ΔP) cells at RCS piping elbows are used to 
measure RCS flows. 
 
 
10.1.1 Temperature 
 
10.1.1.1 Narrow-Range Temperature Detectors  
 
Reactor coolant temperatures are measured by RTDs in the hot and cold legs of the 
RCS.  The outputs of the narrow-range temperature instrumentation (T
h and Tc) are 
further processed to provide the average temperature (Tavg) and the difference 
between the hot-leg and cold-leg temperatures (ΔT) for each coolant loop.  These 
processed signals are used for control room indication, inputs to various control 
systems, and inputs to the reactor protection system (RPS) for the generation of 
protection-grade interlocks and reactor trip signals.  Two narrow-range temperature 
measurement arrangements are used; these are described in the following 
paragraphs. 
 
Prior to 1987, most Westinghouse pressurized water reactors included a bypass 
piping arrangement (Figure 10.1-1a) for the locations of the narrow-range RTDs.  
The plant modeled by the TTC Westinghouse simulator includes such an 
arrangement.  Each reactor coolant loop has two RTD manifolds in the bypass 
piping, one for measuring T
h and one for measuring Tc.  Each manifold includes one 
in-service RTD and an installed spare.  The flow velocities in the bypass piping are 
much lower than the flows in the RCS loops.  The lower flow velocities allow direct-
immersion RTDs to be placed directly into the flow streams without damaging the 
RTDs.  Direct-immersion RTDs provide faster responses to temperature changes of 
the reactor coolant than those of RTDs mounted inside thermowells.   
 
To ensure a representative T
h measurement, three scoops penetrate the hot leg of 
each loop at 120° intervals (see Section 3.2).  The flows from the scoops then 
merge to form a single hot-leg bypass flow to the RTD manifold.  Since the T
c RTD 
manifold supply connection is downstream of the reactor coolant pump (RCP), 
coolant mixing by the pump ensures a representative cold-leg bypass flow, and 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-2 Rev 0505 
multiple scoops are not necessary.  The combined flow from both RTD manifolds is 
returned to the RCS loop via a penetration in the intermediate leg.  Since the flows 
in the bypass piping depend on the differential pressures produced by RCP 
operation, the narrow-range temperature measurements are not accurate or reliable 
during natural circulation conditions. 
 
Plant experience has revealed two major drawbacks associated with bypass piping 
and RTD manifolds.  The first is the relative lack of reliability.  The bypass manifold 
arrangement for a 4-loop plant consists of nearly 280 ft of RCS pressure boundary 
piping, 8 RTD manifolds, approximately 70 valves, and many associated flanges.  
With such a large number of components, numerous plant shutdowns have been 
required because of leakage from mechanical joints or from valve packing, or 
because of flow reductions due to valve problems. 
 
The second major drawback is the high personnel radiation exposure associated 
with the bypass manifold arrangement.  Personnel in containment collect relatively 
high doses from the crud traps (areas of low flow and/or low elevation where 
radioactivity can collect) that exist in this piping configuration.  Workers accumulate 
doses while performing maintenance on the RTDs and while working near the 
bypass manifolds in the general vicinity of the RCPs and the steam generators.  It is 
estimated that the removal of the RTD bypass manifolds and associated piping will 
save 1500 man-rem per nuclear unit over the next few decades. 
 
In response to these problems, the existing bypass piping, manifolds, and valves 
have been cut out of the RCS piping and removed from the containments of most 
Westinghouse plants.  Included in this change is the replacement of the direct-
immersion RTDs with fast-acting, narrow-range RTDs mounted inside thermowells 
which extend directly into the hot- and cold-leg coolant flows.  The existing bypass 
piping penetrations in the hot and cold legs are used for the narrow-range RTD 
thermowells.  The return penetration into the intermediate leg is capped. 
 
Although the response times of the fast-acting RTDs located within the thermowells 
are slower than those of the direct-immersion RTDs, the absence of bypass piping 
means that bypass loop transport lag time is no longer accounted for.  Therefore, 
the total instrumentation response time for this arrangement is little different from 
that of the previous arrangement.  Consequently, changes to the accident analyses 
of the Final Safety Analysis Reports generally have not been required. 
 
Figure 10.1-1b shows the arrangement for measuring narrow-range temperatures 
without bypass manifolds.  Three narrow-range hot-leg RTDs are contained within 
the three flow scoops that remain from the bypass manifold arrangement.  These 
scoops extend into the hot leg piping of each loop.  The use of this configuration, 
three detectors within three nozzles located 120° apart circumferentially, ensures 
that a representative temperature of the hot-leg flow is measured.  A thermowell is 
mounted inside each of these scoops.  Each scoop is modified so that coolant flows 
past the scoop and then enters the scoop through small holes on the downstream 
side, where the coolant contacts the thermowell. 
 
A dual-element RTD is inserted into each thermowell.  One element provides an 
electronic signal to a low voltage amplifier.  The amplified signals from the three hot-
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-3 Rev 0505 
leg RTDs of a particular loop are averaged together to generate a single narrow-
range Th signal (Th average or Thave) for that loop.  This averaged signal, along with 
the Tc signal from that loop, are used to generate a loop Tavg and a loop ΔT signal. 
 
The cold-leg narrow-range RTD of each loop, also a dual-element, fast-acting RTD, 
is inserted into a thermowell directly downstream of the reactor coolant pump.  Due 
to the turbulent flow at the discharge of the RCP, only one narrow-range RTD is 
required to provide an accurate indication of temperature.  One element of the RTD 
provides the narrow-range T
c signal for its associated loop. 
 
The second element of each fast-acting RTD, at each location, is considered an 
installed calibrated spare.  It is wired directly to the RPS cabinets, but it is not 
connected to any electronics.  In the event of a failure of the in-service temperature 
element, the spare element is available for use. 
    
The narrow-range cold-leg RTDs are calibrated to provide an output of 510 - 630°F, 
while the narrow-range hot-leg RTDs are calibrated to provide an output of 530 - 
650°F.  Figure 10.1-2 illustrates how the hot- and cold-leg RTD temperature signals 
are combined to calculate a loop T
avg with a range of 530°F - 650°F, and a loop ΔT 
with a range of 0 - 150%.  These calculated values provide information to the control 
room operators concerning plant conditions. 
 
Figure 10.1-2 also shows that the calculated T
avg and ΔT for each loop are provided 
to the RPS for various protective functions.  Each loop Tavg is provided to an RPS 
channel for the calculation of the overtemperature ΔT (OT ΔT) and overpower ΔT 
(OP ΔT) trip setpoints.  Each loop ΔT is also provided to an RPS channel, where it is 
compared to both the OT ΔT and OP ΔT trip setpoints.  In addition, the loop Tavg 
signals are used to generate two protection-grade interlocks, low Tavg and low-low 
Tavg (permissive P-12).  The protection-grade signals are separated from the control-
grade signals by isolation amplifiers.   
 
The T
avg and ΔT inputs to control systems are provided via auctioneering units, 
which select the highest of the four input loop values.  Auctioneered high T avg is 
supplied to the rod control system (Section 8.1), the pressurizer level control system 
(Section 10.3), and the steam dump control system (Section 11.2).  In addition, 
auctioneered high T
avg and ΔT are supplied to the rod insertion limit calculators 
(Section 8.4). 
 
Reactor coolant T
avg [(Th+Tc )/2] indicates the condition of the coolant with regard to 
the margin to saturation, the heat capacity of the reactor coolant, and the deviation 
from the programmed temperature setpoint (T
ref).  The rate of change of Tavg and its 
deviation from Tref are indicative of an imbalance between primary and secondary 
power.  The average temperature of the coolant is also an input to the determination 
of margin to departure from nucleate boiling (DNB). 
 
When the reactor coolant is subcooled, the coolant ΔT (T
h - Tc) is directly 
proportional to reactor power, and ΔT is used in both control and protection systems 
as a measure of reactor power. 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-4 Rev 0505 
10.1.1.2 Wide-Range Temperature Detectors  
 
Hot- and cold-leg reactor coolant loop temperatures are also measured by wide-
range RTDs (0-700°F) mounted in thermowells in the reactor coolant piping of each 
loop.  These detectors provide indication during heatups and cooldowns and during 
natural circulation operation.  Certain cold-leg and hot-leg wide-range RTDs supply 
inputs to the subcooled margin monitor (section 10.1.6).  The hot-leg wide-range 
RTDs provide inputs to the reactor vessel level indicating system (RVLIS - section 
10.1.5). 
 
10.1.1.3 Pressurizer, Surge Line, and Spray Line Temperature Detectors  
  
There are two temperature detectors on the pressurizer (Figure 10.1-3).  One 
measures steam temperature, and the other measures the water temperature of the 
pressurizer.  Under normal conditions, the pressurizer is a two-phase system in 
equilibrium, so the water and steam temperatures are equal.  When they are not, an 
abnormal condition is indicated.   
 
The surge line temperature detector provides indication and a low temperature 
alarm (< 517°F).  A low temperature alarm indicates that a large insurge of relatively 
cold water has entered the pressurizer or that ambient heat losses have lowered the 
temperature to the alarm setpoint.  The temperature in the surge line should remain 
high due to the constant outflow from the pressurizer which balances the small 
constant spray bypass flow.  
 
Each spray line has a temperature detector which provides indication and provides a 
low temperature alarm (< 450°F).  Normal detector readings indicate that the spray 
bypass flows are keeping the spray lines and pressurizer spray nozzle at a 
temperature near that of the RCS cold legs (see Chapter 3.2).  A low temperature 
alarm could indicate a loss of spray bypass flow, or an incorrectly positioned spray 
bypass throttle valve.  Low spray line temperatures could subject the spray nozzle to 
thermal shock when pressurizer spray is demanded. 
 
10.1.1.4 Safety and Relief Valve Discharge and Pressurizer Relief Tank 
Temperature Detectors 
 
Figure 10.1-3 shows a temperature detector on the discharge line from each 
pressurizer safety valve and a single temperature detector on the common 
discharge line from both power-operated relief valves.  These temperature detectors 
provide indication in the control room that a safety or a power-operated relief valve 
has opened or is leaking. 
 
A high temperature alarm is actuated when the temperature measured by any of 
these detectors exceeds 160°F.  This alarm alerts the control room operator to a 
discharge through one or more relief lines, or to leakage past one or more valve 
seats.  Since these detectors are located close to each other, any single valve 
opening causes an increase in the temperature sensed by all of them.   
 
A temperature detector on the pressurizer relief tank provides indication and 
generates a high temperature alarm (> 112.5°F).  This detector is shown in Figure 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-5 Rev 0505 
10.1-3.  A high temperature in the PRT is an alternate method of alerting the control 
room operator to a relief valve opening or to possible leakage past a relief valve 
seat. 
 
10.1.1.5 Reactor Vessel Flange Leakoff Temperature Detector   
 
A temperature detector located between the leakoff line isolation valve and the 
reactor coolant drain tank is provided to alert the reactor operator to a leak from the 
reactor vessel flange O-ring seal.  This alarm provides audible annunciation in the 
control room and is normally set 20°F above the ambient temperature of the 
containment.   
 
The reactor vessel flange leak detection system may be isolated from the reactor 
coolant drain tank by closing an air-operated valve (CV-8032) from the main control 
board.  This valve is designed to fail closed upon a loss of instrument air to 
containment.  If the reactor vessel flange inner O-ring starts leaking, the outer O-ring 
may be placed in service by manually realigning two valves located inside the 
containment.  (See Section 3.1 for additional vessel flange seal details.) 
 
 
10.1.2 Pressure  
 
10.1.2.1 Pressurizer Pressure Detectors   
 
Four pressurizer pressure transmitters provide indication and control- and 
protection-grade signals.  These signals provide indications in the control room and 
inputs to the pressurizer pressure control system (Chapter 10.2) and the reactor 
protection system (Chapter 12.2).  The pressure in the pressurizer is maintained by 
the operation of heaters immersed in the water volume at the bottom of the 
pressurizer and spray valves in the steam volume at the top.  These transmitters are 
narrow range, with an indication span of 1700 - 2500 psig. 
 
10.1.2.2 Reactor Coolant Loop and Pressuri zer Relief Tank Pressure Detectors 
 
Two pressure transmitters (PT-403 and PT-405) are located in the residual heat 
removal (RHR) system suction line near its penetration into the RCS hot leg (loop 
4).  These are wide-range transmitters (0-3000 psig) and provide indication during 
startups and shutdowns.  They also provide interlocks to permit manual opening of 
(pressure < 425 psig) and to automatically close (pressure > 585 psig) the two 
isolation valves in the RHR suction line from the RCS.  The automatic closure of 
these valves prevents overpressurizing the RHR system piping.   
 
A pressure transmitter on the pressurizer relief tank provides indication in the main 
control room as well as a high pressure alarm set at eight psig.  A high pressure in 
this tank may be indicative of pressurizer relief valve discharge into the PRT.  
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-6 Rev 0505 
10.1.3 Pressurizer Level 
 
Three pressurizer level transmitters provide indication and control- and protection-
grade signals.  These signals provide indications in the control room and inputs to 
the pressurizer level control system (Section 10.3) and the reactor protection system 
(Section 12.2).  The level in the pressurizer is a direct measure of reactor coolant 
inventory.  These transmitters are calibrated for the normal pressurizer operating 
temperature of 650°F.  A fourth level transmitter is cold calibrated (80°F) and 
provides level indication during heatup, refueling, and cold shutdown operations.  
 
 
10.1.4 Reactor Coolant Flow  
 
As shown in Figures 10.1-1a and 10.1-1b, flow in each reactor coolant loop is 
measured by three differential pressure (d/P) transmitters located at the first bend 
(elbow) in the intermediate leg of each reactor coolant loop.  The square root of the 
difference between the pressure at the outside radius and the pressure at the inside 
radius of the bend is proportional to flow.  The developed flow signals provide 
indications in the control room and inputs into the reactor protection system.   
 
There is one common high pressure (HP) tap at the outside radius of each 
intermediate-leg elbow, and there are three separate low pressure (LP) taps at the 
inside radius (see Section 3.2). The pressure at the HP tap is the sum of the static 
reactor coolant system pressure and the pressure resulting from the centrifugal 
force exerted by the coolant flow (the force is proportional to the square of the flow 
velocity).  The LP taps sense only the static coolant system pressure.  Therefore, 
the difference in pressure between the outside radius and the inside radius of the 
intermediate leg is dependent upon flow.   
 
If the HP tap fails (it becomes clogged, or the instrument line ruptures), all three d/P 
transmitters would fail low (indicating an apparent loss of flow) and a reactor trip 
would result (all three measured flows would be less than the loop low flow trip 
setpoint).  If the flow indication arrangement were designed with only one LP tap 
and it failed, then all three d/P transmitters would fail high, which is in the 
nonconservative direction, and a reactor trip on low flow in this loop could not occur. 
Therefore, three LP taps are used to provide redundancy and a conservative system 
response.  If one of the three LP taps were to fail, only its corresponding d/P 
transmitter would be affected (fails high), leaving the remaining two d/P transmitters 
to provide proper indications of flow, as well as low flow inputs to the RPS if flow is 
reduced or lost in that loop. 
 
 
10.1.5 Reactor Vessel Level Indicating System   
 
The reactor vessel level indicating system (RVLIS) is designed to provide a reliable 
method of indicating the water level within the reactor vessel under normal and 
accident conditions.  This instrumentation system is installed in the plant to satisfy a 
requirement of NUREG-0737. In addition to supplying reactor vessel water level 
indication during normal operations, the RVLIS also performs the following functions 
during abnormal operating and accident conditions: 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-7 Rev 0505 
a. Indicates the formation of voids in the reactor coolant system during forced 
circulation; 
b. Detects the approach to inadequate core cooling, and provides information 
needed for selecting emergency operating procedures associated with 
inadequate or degraded core cooling; 
c. Detects voiding in the reactor vessel head; 
d. Provides an accurate measurement of the reactor vessel water level during 
natural circulation; and 
e. Provides information to the operator during operation of the reactor vessel 
head vent system. 
 
As shown in Figure 10.1-4, the RVLIS utilizes two trains of instrumentation; each 
train includes three d/P transmitters for three different ranges of vessel level 
measurement.  These transmitters are designed to measure the water level within 
the reactor vessel or to provide information on the relative void content of the fluid 
surrounding the core during various operating conditions.  
 
Penetrations for the RVLIS into the reactor coolant system pressure boundary are 
made through a spare control rod drive mechanism penetration in the vessel head 
near its center (low pressure tap) and through an incore instrument conduit at the 
seal table (high pressure tap).  In addition, two penetrations (one per hot leg) are 
made in the T
h RTD bypass manifold lines of loop 3 and loop 4. 
   
Each sensing line extending from an RCS penetration includes a sensor bellows unit 
in containment.  The bellows units provide hydraulic coupling for pressure 
measurements.  From its bellows unit each sensing line extends through a 
containment penetration to a second hydraulic coupling device, a hydraulic isolator.  
The hydraulic isolator contains two opposing liquid-filled bellows linked by a 
connecting rod.  Each hydraulic isolator acts as a second isolation valve for the RCS 
and functions as a containment isolation valve. From the hydraulic isolator, the 
sensed pressure is applied to the appropriate d/P transmitter(s).  
 
As shown in Figure 10.1-5, the differential pressures for the three measurement 
ranges are supplied to a microprocessor (one per train).  In addition, pressure and 
temperature inputs to each microprocessor are used for density compensation of 
the measured fluid pressures.  The microprocessor adjusts the measured d/Ps for 
fluid density variations resulting from environmental conditions inside the 
containment to generate reactor vessel levels.   
 
Each microprocessor is located in a cabinet in the control room.  The RVLIS level 
outputs are displayed remotely in the control room and are supplied to the plant 
computer.  The RVLIS provides no annunciation in the control room.   
 
The following paragraphs describe the three d/P transmitters and the ranges of level 
measurement that they provide. 
 
One d/P transmitter is calibrated to measure the level in the reactor vessel with the 
reactor coolant pumps operating (shown as ΔPc in Figures 10.1-4 and 10.1-5).  The 
output from this transmitter is referred to as the dynamic range, with an indicated 
range of 0 - 120%.  It provides an indication of the differential pressure between the 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-8 Rev 0505 
bottom and top of the reactor vessel with forced circulation flow in the RCS.  The 
indicated dynamic range level is typically between 100 and 110%. 
   
The reactor coolant pumps can circulate water and steam as an essentially 
homogeneous mixture. Therefore, if the reactor coolant pumps are circulating 
coolant with a void fraction greater than zero, there will not be a distinct water level 
in the reactor vessel.  However, a comparison of the measured d/P across the 
reactor vessel with the normal single-phase flow d/P provides an approximate 
indication of the relative void content or density of the circulating fluid.   
 
It should be understood that this instrument is not providing an indication of reactor 
vessel level per se during forced circulation, but an indication of the relative void 
fraction of the reactor coolant.  In addition, this instrument provides a backup level 
indication with the reactor coolant pumps turned off; i.e., this instrument is calibrated 
so that it indicates 40% with the reactor vessel full of water and the reactor coolant 
pumps turned off.  Therefore, during natural circulation a value of less than 40% 
would be an indication that the reactor vessel is not completely full.   
 
The second d/P transmitter is calibrated to measure the coolant level in the reactor 
vessel with the reactor coolant pumps secured (ΔPb).  This indication is referred to 
as the full range and spans the total height of the reactor vessel (approximately 40 
ft).  The full-range level should be 100% (the instrument range is 0-120%) with 
natural circulation flow and the reactor vessel completely filled with subcooled 
coolant. 
 
When all reactor coolant pumps are stopped, if any voids exist in the reactor 
coolant, they separate from the liquid.  As a result, the liquid collapses toward the 
bottom of the reactor vessel and the steam voids rise and fill the upper portion of the 
reactor vessel.  This transmitter=s output is an indication of the collapsed water level. 
The actual water level in the reactor vessel may be slightly higher than that 
indicated, due to the presence of very small steam bubbles (froth) mixed with the 
coolant liquid volume.  In this instance, the RVLIS provides a conservative indication 
of coolant level. 
  
With the reactor coolant pumps operating, the pressure sensed at the bottom of the 
vessel (the high pressure tap) is higher than that during natural circulation.  As a 
result of the higher sensed d/P, the full range indication is off-scale high during 
forced circulation, and the information provided is invalid. 
 
The third d/P transmitter provides an indication of the water level in the reactor 
vessel head (ΔPa).  This indication is referred to as the upper range and spans the 
total height from the hot leg to the top of the reactor vessel head (approximately 15 
ft).  The range of indication is 60-120% with natural circulation flow in the reactor 
coolant system.  The upper-range level should be 100% with natural circulation flow 
and the reactor vessel completely filled with subcooled coolant. This instrument 
provides an accurate indication of possible voiding in the upper head region and 
provides useful information during reactor vessel head venting.  This measurement 
also provides backup confirmation that the level in the RCS is above the hot-leg 
nozzles.   
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-9 Rev 0505 
Because the hot-leg tap is positioned to sense static pressure only, when the reactor 
coolant pumps are operating, the measured d/P is less than the calibrated span of 
the upper-range instrument during natural circulation (the indication is off-scale low). 
Therefore, like the indication from the full-range instrument, the output from this 
instrument is invalid whenever there is forced flow through the core. 
 
In summary, the RCP operational status has a large influence on the outputs of 
these d/P transmitters.  The dynamic-range transmitter, ΔPc, is calibrated to indicate 
100% (or slightly greater) with the reactor coolant pumps operating and 40% without 
any RCPs operating.  The full-range transmitter, ΔPb, and the upper-range 
transmitter, ΔPa, are calibrated to indicate 100% with the reactor vessel full of water 
and without any reactor coolant pumps operating.  If the reactor coolant pumps are 
operating, the full-range and upper-range indications are off-scale high and low, 
respectively.  Accordingly, the remote RVLIS panels display the RCP status and the 
expected levels for each indication range in addition to the actual measured levels. 
 
Because of the relatively long sensing lines, temperature changes in the reactor 
coolant and changes in the ambient air temperature inside the containment affect 
the measured levels in the reactor vessel.  Each RVLIS microprocessor is supplied 
with the following inputs to account for the effects of density changes on the 
measured d/Ps to ensure that the indicated level is as accurate as possible: 
 
$ Wide-range T
h (two), 
$ Wide-range loop pressure (one) and, 
$ Capillary tube RTD temperatures (seven). 
 
The temperatures of the sensing lines are used to compensate for the density of the 
fluid.  The temperatures are obtained from strap-on RTDs (vertical capillary tube 
RTDs), which are placed on the vertical portions of various sensing lines.  The 
following are areas through which sensing lines pass and where these strap-on 
RTDs may be placed: 
 
$ Reactor vessel cavity, 
$ Incore thimble tunnel, 
$ Hot-leg penetration area, and 
$ Rise above the seal table. 
 
The capillary tube RTD temperatures, along with the reactor coolant wide-range T
h 
temperature and reactor coolant system wide-range pressure, are supplied to 
microprocessor algorithms which automatically compensate the d/P transmitter 
outputs for density changes. 
 
The remaining inputs into the RVLIS microprocessor are provided by hydraulic 
isolator limit switches.  These switches provide over-travel alarms.  An alarm 
indicates an abnormally large deflection or failure of an isolator bellows, and alerts 
the operators that a hydraulic isolator is operating in an undesirable condition.  An 
overtravel alarm does not necessarily mean that the information provided by the 
RVLIS is invalid. 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-10 Rev 0505 
10.1.6 Subcooling Margin Monitoring 
 
At a given plant, the reactor coolant subcooling margin (margin to saturation) can be 
computed either manually with the aid of steam tables or automatically by a 
computer-based algorithm.  In either case, pressure inputs are supplied by either the 
RCS wide-range pressure detectors or the pressurizer pressure detectors.  In most 
instances, RCS wide-range pressure inputs are used.  The temperature inputs used 
in the computation are RCS wide-range T
h and Tc and temperatures from the core-
exit thermocouples (CETs).  The temperature input that ultimately determines the 
amount of coolant subcooling is typically one of the CET temperatures. 
 
The subcooled margin monitor (SMM) installed in the plant modeled by the TTC 
Westinghouse simulator is a microprocessor-based instrumentation system which 
continually displays the margin to saturation of the reactor coolant.  This instrument 
can determine the subcooling margin in terms of RCS pressure or temperature.  It 
serves as a post-accident monitoring instrument in conjunction with the RVLIS and 
CETs.  It quickly and accurately detects the approach to or existence of saturated 
conditions in the reactor coolant. 
 
As shown in Figure 10.1-6,  each train of the SMM receives the following process 
inputs: 
 
$ One RCS wide-range pressure input, 
$ Two wide-range loop hot-leg temperatures, 
$ One wide-range loop cold-leg temperature, 
$ Eight CET temperatures, and 
$ One cold junction RTD temperature. 
 
The reactor coolant system pressure input is provided by RCS wide-range pressure 
instruments PT-403 (train A) and PT-405 (train B).  Only one pressure input is sent 
to each train, and there is no designated alternate pressure input. 
 
Wide-range T
h inputs from loops two and four are supplied to the train A SMM, while 
Th inputs from loops one and three are supplied to train B.  Due to the limit on inputs 
to the SMM, only one Tc input is provided to each train of the SMM.  The wide-range 
Tc from loop one is input to train A, while the wide-range Tc from loop three is input 
to train B. 
 
Eight core-exit thermocouple inputs (two per core quadrant) are provided to each 
SMM train.  If a thermocouple fails, an input from a designated alternate 
thermocouple may be substituted at the respective train =s isolator. 
 
Cold reference junction temperature inputs are also provided to the SMM calculator 
modules.  Adjusting the CET inputs as necessary with the reference junction 
temperature increases accuracy by compensating for temperature effects on the 
thermocouple cabling. 
 
Two analog outputs are provided by each train of the SMM.  One drives a remote 
temperature display panel (indicating degrees subcooled or superheated) in the 
control room.  The other output is sent to the plant computer and the remote 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-11 Rev 0505 
shutdown station.  In addition, two alarm signals (annunciated in the main control 
room) are provided from the SMM to alert the control room operator to an impending 
loss of core subcooling or to the actual loss of subcooling.   The setpoints for these 
alarms are as follows: 
 
$ 15°F for low margin, and 
$ 0°F for no margin of subcooling. 
 
During normal operation each SMM train supplies a digital display module which 
displays the margin to saturation in either temperature or pressure units (selectable 
by the control room operator with a pushbutton on the display panel).  The selected 
mode is indicated by the backlighting of either the ATEMP@ or APRESS@ segment of 
the pushbutton.  The displayed value is updated every two seconds.   
 
When the pushbutton indicates that ATEMP@ is selected, the subcooling margin is 
displayed in °F with a resolution of 0.1°F.  The indicated temperature margin is the 
difference between the temperature at which the coolant will boil (saturation 
temperature) and the measured reactor coolant temperature.  
 
The highest of all the active input temperature values is used to calculate the 
temperature margin.  The high-selected temperature is compared to the saturation 
temperature calculated from the wide-range pressure input.  The calculated result is 
then the worst-case temperature margin.  A negative temperature margin indicates 
superheated conditions. 
 
When the pushbutton indicates that APRESS@ is selected, the subcooling margin is 
displayed in psi with a resolution of one psi.  The indicated pressure margin is the 
difference between the measured reactor coolant pressure and the pressure at 
which the coolant will boil (the saturation pressure).  The saturation pressure is 
calculated from the high-selected temperature input. 
 
The SMM is particularly useful during accident and post-accident conditions when 
primary coolant temperature and pressure may be rapidly changing.  The control 
room operator is provided with a continuous indication of the margin to saturation 
and is thus able to devote his attention to mitigating the consequences of the 
accident or abnormal condition.  The possibility of unknowingly changing plant 
parameters which could lead to uncovering the core is greatly reduced, as the SMM 
provides automatic alarms at preset subcooling setpoints. 
 
Operability requirements for the SMM trains are contained in the technical 
specification limiting condition for operation (LCO) for post-accident monitoring 
instrumentation.  The impacts of failed inputs on SMM operability are discussed in 
the following paragraphs. 
 
The wide-range loop RTDs (T
h and Tc) are input to the SMM only because they were 
included in the original SMM design.  Should an RTD fail, its input can be disabled in 
accordance with approved procedures at the affected panel, and the associated 
SMM train is still operable.  The RTD inputs are thus "nice to have," but are not 
required for operability.  However, since there is only one pressure input per train, 
the affected SMM train is inoperable when a wide-range pressure detector fails.  
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-12 Rev 0505 
There is no immediate recovery from this condition short of repairing the pressure 
input. 
 
Flexibility was considered in the design of the SMM so that a failure of a CET can be 
overcome.  The outputs of all 65 CETs are routed to two process panels, 32 CET 
outputs to one panel, and 33 CET outputs to the other panel.  Eight operable core-
exit thermocouples, two CETs per core quadrant, are required for each SMM train.  
Eight signals from each process panel are thus transmitted to an SMM train.  Any 
single failed CET input is easily removed from the SMM and replaced by an 
alternate CET input.  The CET which is selected as an alternate must be from the 
same core quadrant as the failed CET.  The operability of the CETs themselves, 
apart from their impact on SMM operability, is also addressed by the post-accident 
monitoring LCO. 
 
 
10.1.7 Summary  
 
RTDs monitor the RCS loop temperatures.  These instruments are divided between 
wide-range (0-700°F) and narrow-range (510 - 630°F or 530 - 650°F) RTDs.  The 
wide-range instruments provide indication in the control room and supply inputs to 
the RVLIS and the SMM.  The signals from the narrow-range RTDs are 
electronically combined to form T
avg and ΔT signals, which are used to provide 
indication for the control room operator and inputs to control systems and the 
reactor protection system. 
 
Temperatures in the pressurizer, pressurizer surge and spray lines, pressurizer 
safety and relief valve discharge lines, the pressurizer relief tank, and the reactor 
vessel flange leakoff line are also monitored. 
 
Reactor coolant system wide-range pressure (0 - 3000 psig) is monitored by 
pressure transmitters located on the residual heat removal suction piping, which is 
attached to loop four of the reactor coolant system.  In addition,  the pressurizer and 
pressurizer relief tank are instrumented so that the reactor operator can monitor the 
pressure and level of these tanks.  The pressurizer pressure and level transmitters 
and their outputs are discussed in Sections 10.2 and 10.3, respectively. 
   
The flow in the reactor coolant system is continuously monitored by loop elbow flow 
d/P transmitters.  The flow in each loop is proportional to the square root of the d/P 
between the inner and outer radii of the loop elbow.  Each reactor coolant loop has 
three d/P transmitters that provide signals for indication and protection.     
 
The RVLIS monitors the level within the reactor vessel during normal and abnormal 
plant conditions.  This system incorporates a number of d/P transmitters to indicate 
the water level in the reactor vessel.  The validity of the different RVLIS indicating 
ranges is sensitive to the presence or absence of forced circulation flow.  In the 
event of an accident, the RVLIS aids the operator in selecting the proper emergency 
procedure for an inadequate or degraded core cooling condition. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 10.1-13 Rev 0505 
The SMM provides an indication of the margin to saturation of the reactor coolant.  
The SMM and the RVLIS are required by NUREG-0737, and their operability is 
dictated by the plant=s technical specifications. 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
