 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 19.0 
 
Plant Operations
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-i Rev 0400 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
19.0 PLANT OPERATIONS ................................................................................ 19-1 
 
19.1 Introduction ........................................................................................ 19-1 
 
19.2 Plant Heatup ...................................................................................... 19-1 
 
19.2.1 Initial C onditions .................................................................... 19-1 
19.2.2 Operations ............................................................................. 19-3 
 
19.3 Reactor Startup to Minimum Load ..................................................... 19-7 
 
19.4 Power Operations .............................................................................. 19-9 
 
19.5 Plant Shutdown................................................................................ 19-11 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
APPENDIX 19-1 Plant Startup from Cold Shutdown .......................................... 19-12 
 
 I. INITIAL CONDITIONS  ............................................................................ 19-12 
 II. INSTRUCTIONS  ..................................................................................... 19-12 
 
A. Heatup from COLD SHUTDOWN to HOT SHUTDOWN 
 (MODE 5 to MODE 4)......................................................................... 19-12 
B. Heatup from HOT SHUTDOWN to HOT STANDBY 
 (MODE 4 to MODE 3)......................................................................... 19-14 
C. Proceeding from HOT STANDBY to POWER OPERATIONS 
 (MODE 3 to MODE 1). ....................................................................... 19-14 
 
Checklist Number 1 ............................................................................................ 19-17 
Checklist Number 2 ............................................................................................ 19-18 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
19-1 ................................................................................. Solid Plant Pressure Control 
19-2 ........................................................................ Nitrogen Bubble Pressure Control 
19-3 .................................................................................. Axial Flux Difference Limits 
19-4 ............................................................... Rod Insertion Limits vs. Thermal Power 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-1 Rev 0109 
19.0 PLANT OPERATIONS  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. Given a list of plant evolutions similar to the following, arrange them in the order 
that they are performed during plant startup, shutdown, or power operations. 
 
a. Reactor coolant system (RCS) filling and venting; 
b. Establishing a pressurizer steam bubble; 
c. Starting reactor coolant pumps; 
d. Placing all engineered safety features (ESF) systems in an operable 
condition; 
e. Establishing the no-load T
avg; 
f. Taking the reactor critical; 
g. Placing main feedwater in service; 
h. Synchronizing and loading the turbine-generator; 
i. Placing the rod control system in automatic, placing the steam generator level 
control system in automatic, and shifting the steam dump control system to 
the T
avg mode; and 
j. Escalating the turbine-generator load to the desired value. 
 
 
19.1 Introduction  
 
The purposes of this chapter are as follows: 
 
1. To review control, instrumentation, and plant systems, and 
 
2. To describe plant operations and system alignments during plant shutdowns, 
plant startups, and power operations.   
 
Basic procedures for starting up, and operating at power, a pressurized water 
reactor plant are described in this chapter.  This discussion is general in nature and 
is designed to review the systems discussed in the previous chapters of this manual 
and describe how they function during plant operations.  An abbreviated plant 
startup procedure is provided in Appendix 19-1 and is used in conjunction with the 
material contained in this chapter. 
 
 
19.2 Plant Heatup  
 
19.2.1 Initial Conditions 
 
For the purposes of this discussion, it is assumed that the reactor coolant system 
has been filled and vented, the reactor coolant pumps (RCPs) are secured, and the 
plant is aligned in a solid-water condition as shown in Figure 19-1.  Solid plant 
operation is one method of pressure control during a shutdown.   
 
With this pressure control scheme, the pressurizer and the RCS are completely 
filled with water.  The pressurizer power-operated relief valves (PORVs), their 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-2 Rev 0109 
associated block valves, and the pressurizer spray valves are shut.  The pressure in 
the RCS is controlled between 320 and 400 psig by maintaining a flow balance 
between the coolant removed from the RCS and the coolant being returned.  
Coolant removal is accomplished by letdown, primarily from the residual heat 
removal system (RHR), and to a lesser extent from the chemical and volume control 
system (CVCS) letdown line.  Coolant is returned to the primary system via the 
CVCS by one of the centrifugal charging pumps.   
 
If the charging and the letdown flows are equal, RCS pressure remains constant.  
Any imbalance between charging and letdown causes the pressure in the RCS to 
increase or decrease.  As an example, increasing charging flow and maintaining the 
letdown flow constant increase the mass of coolant in the RCS.  Since water is 
virtually incompressible, a mass increase causes a pressure increase.   
 
While the plant is in this configuration, HCV-128 (the letdown isolation valve from 
the RHR system) is fully open.  The control room operator manipulates CVCS 
backpressure regulating valve PCV-131 in either automatic or manual to vary the 
rate of letdown from the RCS.  Additional letdown flow from the CVCS is available 
through letdown orifices 8149A, B, and C.  Since the pressure in the RCS is low at 
this time, letdown flow via this piping is extremely low. 
 
RCS overpressure protection is provided by the CVCS letdown line relief valve 
located between the letdown orifice isolation valves and the containment letdown 
isolation valve (CV 8152), by the RHR pump suction and discharge relief valves, and 
by the pressurizer PORVs.  
 
The pressurizer PORV low temperature overpressure mitigation switches must be in 
the UNBLOCK position for the PORVs to actuate at low pressures.  The PORVs, if 
actuated, provide cold overpressure protection by discharging water from the 
pressurizer to the pressurizer relief tank (PRT).  They open, if the pressure in the 
RCS exceeds the cold overpressure protection setpoint. 
 
The nuclear steam supply system (NSSS) is in MODE 5, cold shutdown: T
avg < 
200°F, Keff < 0.99, and N/A for the core power level.  In addition, the following 
conditions exist: the RCS pressure is being maintained between 320 and 400 psig, 
the boron concentration is sufficient to yield a shutdown margin of at least 1% ΔK/K, 
the pressurizer is solid, and reactor coolant pumps are secured.   
 
Decay heat is removed from the core by the residual heat removal system with 
letdown established for RCS cleanup.  The steam generators are in Awet layup@ 
(filled to the 100% level with water), and all secondary systems are secured with the 
exception of one circulating water pump.  The main turbine and both feedwater 
pump turbines are on their respective turning gears.  All pre-startup checklists have 
been completed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-3 Rev 0109 
19.2.2 Operations  
 
As required by the plant’s Technical Specifications, the reactor coolant must be at 
its no-load operating temperature prior to criticality.  The reactor coolant is heated by 
decay heat from the reactor core and reactor coolant pump heat. 
With the plant in cold shutdown, the pressure in the RCS must be at least 320 psig 
to support running the reactor coolant pumps.  A pressure of 320 psig provides two 
functions: first, it ensures a net positive suction head for the RCPs and second, it 
ensures that the minimum differential pressure required for lifting the number one 
pump seals is met.  In addition, the pressure in the RCS must be maintained below 
450 psig while the residual heat removal system is aligned to the reactor coolant 
system.  This ensures that the low pressure piping of the RHR system is not over 
pressurized and prevents the lifting of the RHR pump discharge relief valves.  
Finally, seal injection flow from the chemical and volume control system is required 
to cool and lubricate the lower radial bearings and the seal packages of the RCPs. 
 
Prior to starting the reactor coolant pumps, a steam bubble is established in the 
pressurizer.  This ensures that a surge volume is available in the pressurizer for 
water expansion caused by the heatup of the coolant. 
 
Steam bubble formation in the pressurizer is accomplished by heating the water 
volume of the pressurizer with the pressurizer heaters.  Concurrently, charging and 
letdown flows are adjusted to maintain the pressure within the RCS between 320 
and 400 psig. 
 
When the temperature in the pressurizer reaches 428°F to 448°F (saturation 
temperature for an RCS pressure between 320 psig and 400 psig), charging flow is 
reduced to form the steam bubble.  As the steam bubble forms, RCS letdown is 
increased, and the charging flow is maintained constant.  The difference between 
these flow rates causes the level in the pressurizer to decrease, and operators lower 
the level to 25 percent.  With a steam bubble established in the pressurizer, RCS 
pressure is controlled is by pressurizer heater and spray valve operation.   
 
Nitrogen Bubble Pressure Control  
 
RCS pressure control through use of a nitrogen cover gas can be used as an 
alternate method of controlling pressure.  This control scheme may be used when 
the shutdown requires access to the RCS.  In this mode of pressure control, as 
shown in Figure 19-2, the pressurizer is filled to 90 percent, as indicated by the cold-
calibrated level instrument, and vented to the PRT via open PORVs.   
 
A Tygon hose is temporarily installed between the pressurizer vent line (upstream of 
the PORVs) and the vent on the PRT to supply nitrogen to the pressurizer.  The 
nitrogen pressure regulator for the PRT is adjusted so that six psig of nitrogen 
overpressure is applied to the PRT.  This form of pressure control provides a stable 
RCS pressure without constant operator action, while still allowing some expansion 
and contraction of the coolant.   
 
During nitrogen bubble pressure control, RHR flow is maintained for decay heat 
removal, and letdown and charging are maintained for purification of the reactor 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-4 Rev 0109 
coolant.  Nitrogen is used as a cover gas to minimize corrosion and to prevent 
explosive mixtures of hydrogen and oxygen within the RCS piping or components.   
 
RCS overpressure protection is provided by the letdown line relief valve (if aligned), 
the RHR pump suction and discharge relief valves, and the rupture discs installed 
on the PRT.  Since the RCS and the pressurizer are not completely filled with 
coolant, the chances of an overpressure event are unlikely. The transformation of 
the pressurizer void from nitrogen to steam is accomplished at the start of the plant 
heatup. 
  
Prior to drawing a steam bubble, charging and letdown must be in service.  Letdown 
is via the RHR-to-CVCS cross-connect valve HCV-128.  A letdown flow of 75 gallons 
per minute is established through coordinated operation of HCV-128 (fully open) 
PCV-131 (throttled).  When pressurizer level is < 80 percent, a charging pump is 
started to maintain pressurizer level constant during bubble formation. 
 
All groups of pressurizer heaters are energized to raise the pressurizer water 
temperature to saturation.  Steam formation begins when the pressurizer water 
temperature is at saturation, approximately 230°F at 6 psig.  With the pressurizer at 
saturated conditions, further heating causes the temperature and pressure in the 
pressurizer to increase.  As pressure increases, steam and nitrogen are displaced to 
the PRT. 
 
Indications of steam formation are provided by the pressurizer vapor space and 
pressurizer PORV tailpipe temperature instruments.  Initially, these instruments 
indicate the containment ambient temperature.  With steam formation, their 
indications approach the saturation temperature of 230°F.  Positive indication of a 
steam bubble is determined by the use of the auxiliary spray valve from the CVCS.  
If a steam bubble exists, closing the PORVs and initiating auxiliary spray flow into 
the pressurizer cause a rapid pressure decrease in the pressurizer.  When this 
phenomenon is observed, the PORVs are placed in automatic, and the connection 
between the PRT and the pressurizer is isolated, and the Tygon tubing is removed.  
As pressure increases toward 320 psig, letdown flow is increased to accommodate 
the expansion of the reactor coolant and to lower the level in the pressurizer. 
 
Once a bubble is drawn in the pressurizer and the pressure in the RCS has reached 
320 psig, the reactor coolant pumps are started.  The RCPs are started one at a 
time until all four pumps are running.  After all reactor coolant pumps are operating, 
the residual heat removal pumps are stopped, since they are no longer needed to 
remove decay heat or to provide forced flow through the core as required by the 
plant’s Technical Specifications.   
 
With all four RCPs operating and the RHR system secured, the reactor coolant 
begins to heat up at a rate of approximately 50°F per hour.  The residual heat 
removal system alignment is maintained in its initial configuration to provide an 
adequate letdown capacity for the removal of the excess coolant volume produced 
by expansion due to heatup.  As a result of the heatup and the draining of the 
pressurizer, approximately one-third of the reactor coolant system volume (30,000 
gallons) is diverted to the holdup tanks through the chemical and volume control 
system. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-5 Rev 0109 
Prior to exceeding 200°F (entering MODE 4), all surveillance requirements for 
entering this MODE must be satisfactorily completed (see Checklist No.1).  The 
plant=s Technical Specifications define MODE 4, hot shutdown, as: 350°F > T
avg < 
200°F, Keff < 0.99, and N/A for the core power level.  
  
As the reactor coolant temperature approaches 200°F, steam generator draining is 
commenced through the normal blowdown system.  If the oxygen concentration in 
the reactor coolant is high, hydrazine is added through the chemical and volume 
control system for oxygen scavenging (the oxygen concentration must be within 
specification before the coolant temperature exceeds 250°F). 
 
When the oxygen concentration is within specification, a hydrogen overpressure is 
applied to the volume control tank.  This is accomplished by first securing the 
nitrogen regulator, opening the vent from the volume control tank to the waste gas 
header, and raising the volume control tank level to force the nitrogen to the waste 
gas system.  After the volume control tank level has risen to approximately 95%, the 
hydrogen regulator is placed in service, and the last of the nitrogen is purged to the 
waste gas system.  The volume control tank level is allowed to return to normal with 
the hydrogen regulator maintaining an overpressure of approximately 15 to 20 psig. 
 
An inspection of containment is conducted for debris that could cause blockage of 
the containment sumps or produce fire hazards as the systems and their 
components heat up.  Finally, before the plant enters MODE 4, the containment 
spray system is aligned for operation.  At approximately 220°F RCS temperature, 
steam formation begins in the steam generators.  The nitrogen supply to the steam 
generators, having been applied to prevent or minimize corrosion inside the steam 
generators, is now isolated.   
 
Secondary Plant Heatup  
 
Warming of the steam lines and the main turbine is performed simultaneously with 
the RCS heatup; however, before steam can be supplied to the main turbine, the 
turbine lubricating oil and cooling water systems must be placed in service.  Motor-
driven lubricating oil pumps provide the necessary lubrication for rolling the main 
turbine.  To ensure the even heating of the turbine rotor, the turbine must be on the 
turning gear prior to warming. 
 
The condensate and circulating water systems are started at this time.  The 
condensate and feedwater systems are aligned to provide cleanup of the secondary 
water by circulating condensate through one condensate polishing demineralizer.  
The condensate flows through the in-service polisher and the low pressure heaters 
to the main feedwater pump suctions.  The feedwater pumps are aligned for 
operation, and the feed pump turbines are rotating on their respective turning gears. 
Condensate flows through the idle feedwater pumps and the high pressure heaters 
and then back to the condenser through the feedwater pump recirculation valve. 
 
Warming of the steam lines is initiated by opening the main steam isolation valves 
(MSIVs). thereby admitting steam to the individual steam lines up to the main turbine 
stop valves.  The steam lines are thus heated as the coolant is heated.  Condensate 
that forms in the steam lines is drained to the condenser via steam line drain traps 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-6 Rev 0109 
and drain trap bypasses.  Simultaneous warming of the steam lines and the main 
turbine is accomplished by clearing all turbine generator trip signals and initiating 
turbine shell warming.  The turbine electrohydraulic control (EHC), gland sealing 
steam, and condenser air removal systems must be placed in service to provide 
steam valve control and a condenser vacuum.  Steam blanketing of the moisture 
separator reheaters (MSRs) is also initiated to warm and deaerate the MSR first- 
and second-stage reheater tube bundles.  MSR blanketing steam is supplied by the 
auxiliary steam system. 
 
Before the reactor coolant temperature reaches 350°F, the operators must 
satisfactorily complete the surveillance requirements for entering MODE 3, hot 
standby (see Checklist No. 1).  MODE 3 is defined by the plant’s Technical 
Specifications as: T
avg > 350°F, Keff < 0.99, and N/A for the core power level. 
 
The residual heat removal system is now isolated from the reactor coolant system 
and aligned for at power operation (emergency core cooling system lineup).  At this 
time, all reactor coolant letdown is through the normal letdown orifices of the 
chemical and volume control system.  After the residual heat removal system is 
isolated from the reactor coolant system, pressure is allowed to increase as the 
temperature in the pressurizer increases. 
 
RCS Heatup and Pressurization  
 
As the plant heatup continues, the pressurizer level continues to increase due to 
coolant expansion.  Once placed in automatic, the pressurizer level control system 
automatically compensates by reducing the charging flow.  During this evolution, the 
seal injection flow control valve, HCV-182, may require adjustment by the control 
room operator to maintain the proper reactor coolant pump seal injection flows as 
the charging flow varies. 
 
As reactor coolant pressure increases, letdown flow also increases.  The letdown 
backpressure regulating valve (PCV-131) is adjusted until the normal letdown 
pressure (350 psig) is achieved, and the orifice isolation valves are closed as 
necessary to maintain letdown flow below the allowed maximum of 120 gpm.  When 
reactor coolant system pressure reaches 1925 psig, the cold leg accumulator 
isolation valves are opened, and all emergency core cooling system equipment is 
checked for proper alignment. 
 
Pressure and temperature relationships must be constantly observed during a 
combined plant heatup to prevent an inadvertent reactor trip or safety injection 
actuation signal.  Although the reactor is shut down, a reactor trip signal would 
cause the shutdown rods, possibly already withdrawn, to trip into the core.  A safety 
injection actuation signal would cause the insertion of the shutdown rods and the 
activation of the design bases accident (DBA) sequencers.  A safety injection 
actuation can occur with sloppy RCS pressure control.  Once the pressurizer 
pressure is raised above 1915 psig (P-11 setpoint), the block signal of the low 
pressurizer pressure safety injection actuation is automatically removed.  After that, 
any evolution that would cause RCS pressure to decrease below 1807 psig initiates 
a low pressure safety injection actuation.  
  
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-7 Rev 0109 
A safety injection actuation and main steam isolation can occur if the high steam line 
flow setpoint is exceeded with steam pressures below 600 psig or the RCS Tavg 
below 553°F.  High steam flow could result from an increase in steam flow through 
the steam dump valves or from an increase in the turbine warming rate.  Also, 
overfeeding a single steam generator with cold feedwater can cause its pressure to 
decrease, thereby initiating a high steam line ΔP safety injection actuation.   
 
The primary plant heatup is terminated by automatic actuation of the steam dumps 
(in steam pressure control) when the pressure inside the steam header pressure 
reaches 1092 psig.  The RCS temperature remains constant at 557°F, the steam 
dumps removing any excess energy that would tend to drive the RCS temperature 
higher. 
 
Turbine warming is secured after a specified warming time has been completed.  
Upon completion of heatup and pressurization, the reactor coolant is at the normal 
no-load temperature and pressure values, and the plant is ready for a reactor 
startup.  The turbine and steam lines are warmed, with preparations completed for 
secondary startup.  The pressurizer heaters and sprays are placed in automatic 
control when the pressure reaches the normal operating value of 2235 psig. 
 
A reactor coolant leak rate test is performed when the reactor coolant temperature is 
greater than 400°F and the pressure is equal to 2235 psig.  This test is required at 
this time only if the reactor coolant system has been opened for refueling or 
maintenance. 
 
Prior to reactor startup, the plant conditions are as follows:   
 
$ The RCS is at normal operating temperature and pressure (557°F, and 2235 
psig),  
$ The reactor is shut down (subcritical), 
$ A condenser vacuum has been drawn, 
$ The steam dump control system is oper ating in the steam pressure mode, 
$ The main turbine and feedwater pump turbines are rotating on their turning 
gears, and 
$ All electrical power is supplied from off-site.  
 
 
19.3 Reactor Startup to Minimum Load  
 
A reactor startup is performed at the no-load temperature of 557°F.  The Technical 
Specifications require a minimum temperature, 551°F, for criticality.  If the coolant 
average temperature drops below this value, the operator either restores the 
temperature within a short period of time or makes the reactor subcritical. 
 
Prior to the withdrawal of the control rods to cause core criticality, an estimated 
critical condition (ECC) is calculated.  The ECC calculation is a reactivity balance 
comparing the previous critical condition and reactivity changes following the last 
shutdown to the desired conditions for the next startup.  Since the previous and 
present reactivity conditions are known, it is relatively easy to calculate the required 
conditions for the next criticality.  The reactivity variables for which the operator has 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-8 Rev 0109 
direct control are boron concentration and control rod position.  The ECC is normally 
computed using a desired critical rod position.  The boron concentration is then 
adjusted so that the reactor will be critical at the desired rod position. 
 
Prior to entering MODE 2, startup, and MODE 1, power operation, all surveillance 
requirements for entering these modes must be satisfactorily completed (see 
Checklist No. 2).  MODE 2 is defined by the plant’s Technical Specifications as: K
eff 
≥ .99 and core power level ≤ 5%. MODE 1 is defined as: Keff ≥ 0.99 and core power 
level > 5%. 
 
Control rods are withdrawn to establish criticality.  It is difficult to identify exactly 
when criticality is achieved during a startup; however, it is readily apparent when 
supercritical conditions are reached.  Supercriticality is indicated by a constant 
positive startup rate and steadily increasing source range count rate with no control 
rod withdrawal.  Criticality is declared when these conditions are observed.  After 
criticality is achieved, the control rods are positioned to increase nuclear power to 
10
-8 amps in the intermediate range.  When power exceeds the source range block 
permissive (P-6) setpoint, the source range trip is manually blocked and the source 
range high voltage supply is de-energized.  Power is stabilized at 10
-8 amps to 
record actual critical conditions.  The data recorded consists of the control rod 
positions, boron concentration, and RCS loop average temperatures. 
 
After recording the critical data, the control rods are positioned to increase power to 
the point of adding heat, approximately one percent power as indicated on the 
power range instruments, and then to stabilize power at about two percent.  As 
nuclear power increases above the point of adding heat, the fuel and moderator 
temperatures increase.  These temperature increases add negative reactivity 
because of the negative fuel and moderator temperature coefficients.   
 
As the moderator temperature increases, the coolant expands into the pressurizer, 
causing the level and pressure to increase.  Also, the steam generator temperatures 
and pressures begin to increase.  Since the steam dumps are in the steam pressure 
mode of control, the steam dump valves modulate open, maintaining the steam 
header pressure at 1092 psig.  1092 psig is the saturation pressure for 557°F, which 
is the no-load T
avg.  With the steam dumps in steam pressure mode, the RCS T avg 
does not follow the programmed Tavg; it increases to produce the primary-to-
secondary ΔT needed to support a steam flow of about two percent of the full-load 
value. 
 
As the steam dumps modulate open, increasing the steam flow to the main 
condenser, feedwater flows to the steam generators must be increased.  Since the 
motor-driven (nonsafety-grade) auxiliary feedwater pump can supply only about two 
percent of rated feed flow, care is exercised to ensure that the power level does not 
exceed two percent. 
 
With the power level at some point between 1 x 10
-8 amps and two percent, the 
anticipated reactivity changes for power escalation, caused by the increase in power 
defect and by the change in xenon concentration, are determined, and the required 
boron concentration change is started.  The rate of power increase could be limited 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-9 Rev 0109 
by improper control rod position if the power defect and xenon concentration change 
are not predicted correctly. 
 
The power level is maintained at two percent while a main feedwater pump is 
started and aligned to supply the steam generators through the main feed regulating 
bypass valves.  The main feedwater bypass valves are then manually manipulated 
to control steam generator levels.  The main feed pump speed is controlled in 
manual to maintain 50 - 150 psid between the feed and steam pressures, enough to 
ensure adequate feed flow to the steam generators through the bypass valves.  
With a main feedwater pump feeding the steam generators and the auxiliary 
feedwater system realigned to its normal at-power standby lineup, turbine startup 
may proceed. 
 
To minimize primary plant transients, the turbine is rolled with reactor power 
between 10 and 15 percent.  Control rods are withdrawn to raise core power and the 
RCS temperature.  The steam generator temperatures and pressures would tend to 
increase with the RCS temperature; however, the steam dumps modulate open to 
maintain a constant steam pressure constant and to create the steam demand 
which changes the ΔT across the core.   
 
With nuclear power at 15 percent, the main turbine is rolled off the turning gear and 
accelerated to 1800 rpm.  As steam flow to the turbine increases, the steam dumps 
modulate in the closed direction to maintain the 1092-psig steam header pressure.  
With the turbine running at 1800 rpm, the turbine auxiliary systems are aligned for 
normal operation, and the turbine protection system is tested to verify proper 
operation.  Also at this time, the MSR steam control is placed in automatic, thereby 
removing the auxiliary steam supply from MSR steam blanketing and initiating 
operation of the normal first- and second-stage MSR steam supplies.  Generator 
synchronization is performed after satisfactory turbine protection system testing.   
 
When the main generator voltage, frequency, and phases are matched with those of 
the grid, the generator output breakers are closed, and the generator picks up a 
minimum load of approximately 60 MWe.  When the generator output breakers 
close, the turbine EHC system automatically shifts from speed control to load 
control, and operators can now increase the generator’s electrical output to the grid. 
 
 
19.4 Power Operations  
 
The turbine loading rate is determined by the most limiting of the following: the 
turbine loading limit curve, fuel pre-conditioning requirements, or the load 
dispatcher’s request.  Once the loading rate is determined, the turbine load is 
increased to 180 MWe, about 15 percent turbine load.  Increasing the turbine load 
to 180 MWe results in a shift of steam flow from the steam dumps to the turbine with 
little or no change in nuclear power.  When the steam dump valves are fully closed, 
they are placed in the T
avg mode of operation.   
 
Rod control is placed in automatic when the turbine load satisfies the C-5 interlock 
(15 percent turbine load) and T
avg is within 1°F of Tref.  Since the main feedwater 
bypass regulating valves are rated for 20 - 25 percent of full-load feedwater flow, the 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-10 Rev 0109 
main feedwater regulating valves are placed in service prior to the load increasing 
above 20 percent.  Main feed pump speed control can be placed in automatic when 
the main feed regulating valves are controlling the steam generator levels. 
 
To prevent axial xenon oscillations and to maintain peaking factors within license 
limits, the operator must insure that the indicated axial flux difference (AFD) is 
maintained within the limits illustrated in Figure 19-3.  Some nuclear units may 
operate with AFD maintained within a required target band which is more restrictive 
than the limits shown in this figure.  Even with the liberal limits of Figure 19-3, the 
plant is likely to operate with AFD administratively maintained within a much more 
restrictive AFD target band.  Such restrictions mandate the following operational 
conventions: 
 
1. The control rods are nearly fully withdrawn during all phases of power operations 
(except for short-term transients).  The increase in power defect associated with 
a power escalation, is thus overcome with boron dilution. 
 
2. The dilution of the coolant boron concentration is a slow process.  Therefore, 
power changes at sustained rates of greater than 1% - 2%/minute are not 
possible if the AFD is to be maintained within the band. 
 
During the power escalation from 20 percent to 100 percent power, additional 
secondary pumps are placed into service.  These include condensate pumps, 
circulating water pumps, service water pumps, the second feedwater pump, and 
heater drain tank pumps.  Condensate demineralizers are also sequentially placed 
in service as power increases. 
 
The turbine load is increased by selecting the desired loading rate and pressing the 
load increase pushbutton to increase the load setpoint to the desired value.  The 
main turbine control valves modulate to positions which should produce the 
generator electrical output selected with the load-set controller.  A turbine first-stage 
pressure feedback signal may adjust the control valve positioning signal to ensure 
that the desired load is actually attained. 
 
The single-loop loss of flow permissive (P-8) enables the single-loop loss of flow 
reactor trip when reactor power exceeds 39%. 
 
At approximately 50% load, a calorimetric calculation (heat balance) is performed on 
the secondary system, and an adjustment to the power range nuclear instruments is 
performed if necessary.  Further calorimetric calculations are performed at 90% and 
100% power.  These additional calculations are performed to ensure that the power 
range nuclear instruments are properly calibrated. 
 
At all times when the reactor is critical, the control banks must be maintained above 
their respective insertion limits.  All shutdown banks and control banks A and B must 
be fully withdrawn, while control banks C and D must be withdrawn to positions that 
are greater than the limits specified in Figure 19-4.  Maintaining the rod banks above 
their respective insertion limits ensures that sufficient negative reactivity is available 
to achieve and maintain the required shutdown margin in the event of a reactor trip. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-11 Rev 0109 
19.5 Plant Shutdown 
 
A plant shutdown is accomplished by essentially reversing the steps described for 
completing a plant startup. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-12 Rev 0109 
APPENDIX 19-1 
Plant Startup from Cold Shutdown 
 
I. INITIAL CONDITIONS 
 
1. Cold Shutdown - MODE 5: 
 
$ K
eff < 0.99 
$ 0% power 
$ T avg < 200°F 
 
2. Reactor Coolant System: solid. 
3. RCS Temperature: 150 - 160°F. 
 
Note: 
Temperature may be less than 150°F depending upon the decay heat load of the 
core. 
 
4. RCS Pressure: 320 - 400 psig. 
5. Steam Generators: filled to wet la yup (100% wide-range level indication). 
6. Secondary Systems: shutdown, main turbine and feedwater pump turbines 
on their turning gears. 
7. Pre-Startup Checklists: completed. 
 
 
II. INSTRUCTIONS 
 
A. Heatup from COLD SHUTDOWN to HOT SHUTDOWN 
 (MODE 5 to MODE 4)  
 
1. Permission received from Operations Supervisor for startup. 
2. Begin establishing steam generator water levels to 33 " 5% narrow-range 
indication. 
3. Verify or establish RCP seal injection flow. 
 
CAUTION: 
Do not exceed a heatup rate of 100°F/hr in the pressurizer or 100°F/hr in the RCS. 
Do not exceed 320°F ΔT between pressurizer and spray temperature.  Use auxiliary 
spray for pressurizer volume and coolant mixing. 
 
4. Energize pressurizer heaters and begin pressurizer heatup. 
5. Establish a pressurizer steam bubble by; 
 
a. Increasing pressurizer temperature using pressurizer heaters. 
b. Adjust charging and letdown flow to maintain pressurizer pressure at 
approximately 320-400 psig while reducing pressurizer level. 
c. As pressurizer temperature approaches 428 EF (saturation temperature  
 for 320 psig), reduce pressurizer level toward 25%. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-13 Rev 0109 
APPENDIX 19-1 (cont’d) 
Plant Startup from Cold Shutdown 
 
6. Start the reactor coolant pumps.  Af ter running the pumps for five minutes, 
sample the RCS for chemistry specifications.  Partially open pressurizer spray 
valves for coolant mixing. 
7. Maintain the RCS temperature < 160°F by adjusting flow through the RHR heat 
exchangers. 
 
NOTE: 
The 160°F limit is based on cold water addition accident.  This limits the ΔT between 
seal injection water accumulating in the intermediate leg and the remainder of the 
RCS. 
 
8. Stop RHR pumps. 
9. Allow RCS temperature to increase to 200°F. 
10. When RCS temperature reaches 200°F, ascertain that primary system water 
chemistry is within specifications. 
11. When pressurizer level is at the no-load operating level (25%), place the 
pressurizer level control system in automatic. 
12. Verify shutdown rods are withdrawn and that sufficient SHUTDOWN MARGIN is 
available. 
13. Ensure applicable pre-startup Technical Specification requirements are met.  
(See Checklist No. 1.) 
14. At 200°F RCS temperature, establish a hydrogen blanket in the volume control 
tank. 
15. Open main steam isolation valves and warm main steam lines. 
16. Continue pressurizer heatup to maintain desired pressure.  Use low pressure 
letdown control valve to maintain letdown flow.  Once a steam bubble is 
established in the pressurizer, RCS pressure will be controlled by heater and 
spray operation. 
17. Condensate cleanup is in progress. 
18. When condensate chemistry is within specifications, align the condensate and 
feedwater systems to the normal at-power configuration. 
19. Verify condenser vacuum. 
20. Warm the main turbine. 
 
CAUTION: 
Prior to reaching 350°F in the RCS, perform or verify the following: 
 
 $ Verify the control rod drive mechanism cooling fans are operating. 
 $ Terminate residual heat removal letdown to the CVCS.  
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-14 Rev 0109 
APPENDIX 19-1 (cont’d) 
Plant Startup from Cold Shutdown 
 
B. Heatup from HOT SHUTDOWN to HOT STANDBY 
 (MODE 4 to MODE 3) 
 
1. Ensure applicable pre-startup Technical Specification requirements are met.  
(See Checklist No. 1.) 
2. Complete the ECCS Master C hecklist (SI, RHR, etc. are aligned). 
3. Maintain RCS pressure within the operating band of the Pressure-Temperature 
Limitations Curve. 
 
NOTE: 
As the RCS pressure increases, maintain letdown flow at a maximum of 120 gpm by 
increasing the setting of the backpressure regulator (PCV-131) until pressure 
reaches 350 psig and then by closing the letdown orifice isolation valves as 
necessary. 
 
4. Prior to the RCS reaching 1000 psig, open each cold leg accumulator isolation 
valve and then de-energize each valve’s motor operator. 
5. When RCS pressure exceeds 1915 psig, verify the block of the pressurizer low 
pressure safety injection actuation automatically resets. 
6. When RCS temperature reaches 553°F, verify the block of the high steam line 
flow safety injection actuation automatically resets. 
7. Maintain RCS temperature with the steam dump control system in the steam 
pressure mode. 
8. Establish HOT STANDBY conditions of 557°F T avg. 
 
 
C. Heatup from HOT STANDBY to POWER OPERATIONS 
 (MODE 3 to MODE 1)  
 
NOTE: 
See Checklist No. 2. 
 
1. Obtain administrative permission to take the reactor critical. 
2. Notify system dispatcher of unit startup and approximate time when the 
generator will be tied to the grid. 
3. Notify onsite personnel of the reactor startup over the public address system. 
4. Perform reactor trip breaker check (if not performed during the previous seven 
days). 
5. Calculate the estimated critical boron c oncentration for the desired critical control 
rod withdrawal position. 
6. If necessary, conduct a boron concentra tion change to achieve the estimated 
critical boron concentration.  Equalize the boron concentrations in the reactor 
coolant loops and the pressurizer by turning on the pressurizer backup heaters. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-15 Rev 0109 
APPENDIX 19-1 (cont’d) 
Plant Startup from Cold Shutdown 
 
NOTE: 
Nuclear instrumentation shall be monitored very closely in anticipation of an 
unplanned rate of reactivity change. 
 
NOTE: 
Block the alarm for source range high flux level at shutdown at both source range 
drawers. 
 
7. Verify all shutdown banks are fully withdrawn within 15 minutes of withdrawing 
control banks. 
8. If the shutdown banks are inserted, complete a shutdown margin calculation 
(involving the shutdown banks at the fully withdrawn position) to preclude an 
inadvertent MODE change during rod withdrawal.  Withdraw the shutdown banks 
to the fully withdrawn position. 
9. Verify proper operation of all reactor coolant pumps. 
10. Withdraw the control bank rods in manual to take the reactor critical. 
11. If the control bank height at criticality is below the rod insertion limit for 0% 
power: 
 
a. Reinsert all control bank rods to the bottom of the core. 
b. Recalculate the estimated critical boron concentration. 
c. Borate to the newly calculated concentration. 
d. Withdraw the control bank rods in manual to take the reactor critical 
 
12. Withdraw rods to increase reactor power.  Block the source range high flux trip at 
P-6 (10-10 amps on the intermediate range).  Take critical data at 1x10-8 amps 
(typically). 
13. Withdraw rods to bring reactor power to approximately 2% on the power range 
indicators and select the highest indicating power range channel to be recorded 
on the NR-45 recorder. 
14. Check that the steam dump pressure controller is set for 1092 psig and 
operating in automatic. 
15. If one is not already running, start a main feedwater pump at 2% power.  
Maintain steam generator levels at 33 " 5% narrow-range level indication during 
secondary plant startup by throttling the feedwater bypass regulating valves. 
 
CAUTION: 
The secondary plant operator should coordinate changes in steam generator 
steaming rates removal and in feedwater addition rates with the reactor operator 
while rod control is in manual. 
 
16. Verify the turbine has been on the turning gear for at least one hour. 
17. Increase reactor power by manual withdrawal of the control banks until the 
steam dumps are bypassing steam flow equivalent to 10 - 15% nuclear power. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-16 Rev 0109 
APPENDIX 19-1 (cont’d) 
Plant Startup from Cold Shutdown 
 
18. When reactor power increases above 10%, verify the ?Nuclear At-Power@ 
Permissive P-10 light illuminates and the ?At-Power@ Permissive P-7 light 
extinguishes. 
 
NOTE: 
The ?at-power@ reactor trips are now enabled. 
 
19. Manually block the intermediate range high flux reactor trip and the power range 
high flux, low setpoint reactor trip after P-10 has been reached. 
20. Verify that the main and unit auxiliary transformer cooling systems are aligned for 
automatic operation. 
21. Accelerate the main turbine to 1800 rpm, and then synchronize the generator 
and connect it to the grid. 
22. Increase generator load at the desired rate while maintaining Tavg with manual 
rod control. 
 
CAUTION: 
Maintain programmed steam generator level during the following step. 
 
23. At approximately 15% power, transfer feedwater flow control from the bypass 
valves to the main feedwater regulating valves. 
24. When turbine power has increased above ~180 MWe (15% - the C-5 interlock 
setpoint), transfer the rod control system to automatic. 
25. After rod control is placed in automatic, check that steam pressure is less than 
the pressure control setpoint (1092 psig) and that all steam dump valves are 
closed, then transfer the steam dump control system to the  T avg control mode. 
26. Transfer steam generator feedwater regulating control valves and feed pump 
speed control to automatic when power exceeds 15%. 
27. Place additional secondary equipment in service as necessary to support further 
load increases. 
28. At 50% power, place the remainder of secondary pumps in service. 
29. Perform secondary calorimetric (heat balance) calibrations for nuclear 
instrumentation adjustment as required 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-17 Rev 0109 
Checklist Number 1 
 
NOTE: 
This listing is typical of the TECHNICAL SPECIFICATION limiting conditions for 
operation and TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS for changing MODES during a plant 
heatup.  This is not a comprehensive list. 
 
REACTIVITY CONTROL (Section 1): 
 
Shutdown Margin        Boration Flow Paths 
Charging Pumps         Borated Water Sources 
 
INSTRUMENTATION (Section 3): 
 
Reactor Trip System Instrumentation 
Engineered Safety Features Actuation System Instrumentation 
 
REACTOR COOLANT SYSTEM (Section 4): 
 
RCS Loops          Pressurizer 
Pressurizer Safety Valves      Pressurizer PORVs 
RCS Leakage, Chemistry, Activity   RCS Pressure/Temperature Limits 
Steam Generator Tube Integrity 
 
EMERGENCY CORE COOLING SYSTEMS (Section 5): 
 
ECCS Trains          Refueling Water Storage Tank 
Accumulators  
 
CONTAINMENT SYSTEMS (Section 6): 
 
Containment Leakage, Structural Integrity Air Locks 
Internal Pressure        Air Temperature 
Containment Spray and Cooling Systems Spray Additive System  
Containment Isolation Valves 
 
PLANT SYSTEMS (Section 7): 
 
Main Steam Safety Valves      Auxiliary Feedwater System 
Component Cooling Water System   Service Water System 
Condensate Storage Tank      Main Steam Isolation Valves 
 
ELECTRICAL POWER SYSTEMS (Section 8): 
 
A C  S o u r c e s           D C  S o u r c e s  
Distribution Systems 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 19-18 Rev 0109 
Checklist Number 2 
 
NOTE: 
This listing is typical of the TECHNICAL SPECIFICATION limiting conditions for 
operation and TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS for changing MODES during reactor 
startup and power operations.  This is not a comprehensive list. 
 
REACTIVITY CONTROL (Section 1): 
 
Moderator Temperature Coefficient 
Rod Group Alignment Limits 
Shutdown and Control Banks - Rod Insertion Limits 
Rod Position Indication 
 
POWER DISTRIBUTION LIMITS (Section 2): 
 
Axial Flux Difference 
Heat Flux Hot Channel Factor (FQ(Z)) 
Nuclear Enthalpy Rise Hot Channel Factor 
Quadrant Power Tilt Ratio 
 
INSTRUMENTATION (Section 3): 
 
Reactor Trip System Instrumentation 
Engineered Safety Features Actuation System Instrumentation 
Movable Incore Detectors 
 
REACTOR COOLANT SYSTEM (Section 4): 
 
DNB Parameters 
Minimum Temperature for Criticality 
RCS Loops 
 
CONTAINMENT SYSTEMS (Section 6): 
 
Hydrogen Mixing System 
---PAGE---
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
