 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 5.2 
 
Emergency Core Cooling Systems
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-i Rev 0406 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
5.2 EMERGENCY CORE COOLING SYSTEMS ................................................ 5.2-1 
 
5.2.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 5.2-1 
 
5.2.2 Regulatory Requirements ................................................................... 5.2-2 
 
5.2.2.1 General Design Criteria ......................................................... 5.2-2 
5.2.2.2 ECCS Acceptance Criteria .................................................... 5.2-3 
 
5.2.3 General Description ............................................................................ 5.2-4 
 
5.2.4 System Descriptions ........................................................................... 5.2-4 
 
5.2.4.1 Cold-Leg Injection Accumulators ........................................... 5.2-4 
5.2.4.2 High Head Inject ion System .................................................. 5.2-6 
5.2.4.3 Refueling Water Storage Tank .............................................. 5.2-8 
5.2.4.4 Intermediate Head Injection (Safety Injection) System ......... 5.2-9 
5.2.4.5 Low Head Inject ion System ................................................. 5.2-10 
5.2.4.6 Containment Reci rculation Sump ........................................ 5.2-11 
 
5.2.5 Emergency Core Cooling Systems Integrated Operations ............... 5.2-12 
 
5.2.6 PRA Insights ..................................................................................... 5.2-16 
 
5.2.7 Summary  .......................................................................................... 5.2-17 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
5.2-1 Normal Operating Status of Emergency Core Cooling System 
  Components ............................................................................................ 5.2-18 
5.2-2 Accumulator Design Parameters  ............................................................ 5.2-18 
5.2-3 Centrifugal Charging Pump Design Parameters ..................................... 5.2-18 
5.2-4 Boron Injection Tank Design Parameters  ............................................... 5.2-19 
5.2-5 Refueling Water Storage Tank Design Parameters  ............................... 5.2-19 
5.2-6 Safety Injection Pump Design Parameters  ............................................. 5.2-19 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-ii Rev 0406 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
5.2-1 .................................................................................................ECCS Composite 
5.2-2 ............................................................................ Cold Leg Accumulator System 
5.2-3 ................................................................................ High Head Injection System 
5.2-4 ....................................................................................... Safety Injection System 
5.2-5 .......................................................................... Residual Heat Removal System 
5.2-6 ........................................................................ Containment Recirculation Sump 
5.2-7 .............................................................................. Recirculation Sump Features 
5.2-8 .................................................... Recirculation Sump Cartridge Pocket Screens 
5.2-9 ............................................................... Recirculation Sump Sure-Flow Strainer 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-1 Rev 0406 
5.2  EMERGENCY CORE COOLING SYSTEMS  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. Explain why emergency core cooling systems (ECCSs) are incorporated into 
plant design. 
 
2. State the purposes of the following systems: 
 
a. Accumulator injection system, 
b. High head injection system, 
c. Intermediate head injection (safety injection) system, and 
d. Low head injection system. 
 
3. State the purposes of the following major components: 
 
a. Refueling water storage tank (RWST), and 
b. Containment recirculation sump. 
 
4. List the order of ECCS injection during the following abnormal conditions: 
 
a. Small (slow depressurization) loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA), and 
b. Large loss-of-coolant accident. 
 
5. Describe the ECCS flowpaths during the following modes of operation: 
 
a.  Cold-leg injection, 
b.  Cold-leg recirculation, and 
c.  Hot-leg recirculation. 
 
 
5.2.1 Introduction  
 
The purposes of the emergency core cooling systems are as follows: 
 
1. Emergency core cooling systems: 
 
$ Provide core cooling to minimize fuel damage following a LOCA, and 
$ Provide additional shutdown margin following a steam line break accident. 
 
2. Cold-leg accumulators (passive system - section 5.2.4.1): 
 
$ Rapidly refill the reactor vessel dow ncomer and bottom plenum and begin to 
reflood the core following a large LOCA. 
 
3. High head injection system (active system - section 5.2.4.2): 
 
$ Provides high pressure, low volume safety injection for small to intermediate 
sized LOCAs, and 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-2 Rev 0406 
$ Adds negative reactivity and makes up for reactor coolant contraction by 
injecting borated water into the reactor coolant system (RCS) following a 
steam line break. 
 
4. Intermediate head injection (safety injection) system (active system - section 
5.2.4.4): 
 
$ Provides intermediate pressure, low volume safety injection for small to 
intermediate sized LOCAs. 
 
5. Low head injection system (active system - section 5.2.4.5): 
 
$ Provides low pressure, high volume  safety injection to complete the 
reflooding of the core following a LOCA, and 
$ Provides a flowpath and heat sink for long-term core cooling following a 
LOCA. 
 
As listed above, the emergency core cooling systems consist of one passive system 
and three active systems. 
 
The passive system (accumulators) consists of large volume tanks of borated water 
pressurized with nitrogen.  The pressure in the passive system is less than that of 
the RCS.  Following an accident, when RCS pressure decreases below tank 
pressure, the borated water is injected. 
 
The active systems (high, intermediate, and low pressure injection systems) consist 
of several pumping systems capable of varying discharge pressures and flow rates. 
Each of these systems does not start until it receives an accident initiation signal (a 
safety injection actuation).  Once started, these systems inject borated water into the 
RCS as the RCS pressure decreases below the discharge pressures of the system 
pumps. 
 
The ECCSs are designed to cool the reactor core and provide additional shutdown 
capability following initiation of the following accident conditions:  
 
1. Loss of coolant from the RCS in excess of the normal makeup capability, 
2. Steam generator tube rupture, and 
3. Pipe break in the main steam system. 
 
The emergency core cooling systems provide reactor shutdown capability for the 
accidents listed above by means of chemical poison (boron) injection. 
 
 
5.2.2 Regulatory Requirements 
 
5.2.2.1 General Design Criteria  
 
The emergency core cooling systems are designed in accordance with 10 CFR 50, 
Appendix A, General Design Criteria 35, 36, and 37.  Criteria 36 and 37 address 
system inspection and testing.  Criterion 35 states: 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-3 Rev 0406 
A system to provide abundant emergency core cooling shall be provided. The 
system safety function shall be to transfer heat from the reactor core following 
any loss of reactor coolant at a rate such that (1) fuel and clad damage that 
could interfere with continued effective core cooling is prevented and (2) clad 
metal-water reaction is limited to negligible amounts. 
 
Suitable redundancy in components and features, and suitable interconnections, 
leak detection, isolation, and containment capabilities shall be provided to assure 
that for onsite electric power system operation (assuming offsite power is not 
available) and for offsite electric power system operation (assuming onsite power 
is not available) the system safety function can be accomplished, assuming a 
single failure. 
 
5.2.2.2 ECCS Acceptance Criteria  
 
The emergency core cooling systems must also meet the requirements of 10 CFR 
50.46, the acceptance criteria for ECCSs for light-water nuclear power reactors.  10 
CFR 50.46, in part, states: 
 
Each ... pressurized light-water nuclear power reactor fueled with uranium oxide 
pellets within cylindrical zircaloy or ZIRLO cladding must be provided with an 
emergency core cooling system that must be designed so that its calculated 
cooling performance following postulated loss-of-coolant accidents conforms to 
the [following] criteria: 
 
1. Peak Cladding Temperature.  The calculated maximum fuel element cladding 
temperature shall not exceed 2200EF. 
 
2. Maximum Cladding Oxidation.  The calculated total oxidation of the cladding 
shall nowhere exceed 0.17 times the total cladding thickness before 
oxidation. 
 
3. Maximum hydrogen generation.  The calculated total amount of hydrogen 
generated from the chemical reaction of the cladding with water or steam 
shall not exceed 0.01 times the hypothetical amount generated if all of the 
metal in the cladding cylinders surrounding the fuel, excluding the cladding 
surrounding the plenum volume, were to react. 
 
4. Coolable Geometry.  Calculated changes in core geometry shall be such that 
the core remains amenable to cooling. 
 
5. Long-term cooling.  After any calculated successful initial operation of the 
ECCS, the calculated core temperature shall be maintained at an acceptably 
low value and decay heat shall be removed for the extended period of time 
required by the long-lived radioactivity remaining in the core. 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-4 Rev 0406 
5.2.3 General Description  
 
The emergency core cooling systems are comprised of the accumulators, the 
centrifugal charging pumps (CCPs), the safety injection pumps, the residual heat 
removal (RHR) pumps, the RHR heat exchangers, the refueling water storage tank, 
the containment recirculation sump, and the associated valves and piping.  Table 
5.2-1 lists normal parameter values associated with these systems; Figure 5.2-1 
provides a composite diagram of the systems.  The order of system injection into the 
RCS is dependent on the nature and severity of the accident. 
 
For large reactor coolant pipe ruptures, the RCS would be depressurized and voided 
of coolant rapidly; a high flow rate of emergency coolant is required to quickly 
recover the exposed fuel rods and to limit core damage.  This high flow is provided 
almost immediately by the passive cold-leg accumulators and then subsequently by 
the active CCPs, safety injection pumps, and RHR pumps discharging into the cold 
legs of the RCS.  The suction source for all active systems is the RWST. 
 
Emergency cooling is provided for smaller reactor coolant pipe ruptures primarily by 
the high head and intermediate head injection pumps.  A small-break LOCA 
(SBLOCA) has an equivalent diameter of 6 inches or less and does not immediately 
depressurize the reactor coolant system below the accumulator discharge pressure. 
As the RCS depressurizes during an SBLOCA, the centrifugal charging (high head 
injection) pumps and possibly the safety injection (intermediate head injection) 
pumps deliver borated water at the prevailing RCS pressure to the cold legs of the 
RCS.  During the injection, the pumps take suction from the RWST. 
 
In response to a steam pipe break, injection by the CCPs makes up for the reactor 
coolant contraction (reduction in coolant volume) associated with the break-induced 
cooldown of the reactor coolant.  The borated water from the RWST also adds 
negative reactivity, which counters the positive reactivity addition from the cooldown. 
 
 
5.2.4 System Descriptions 
 
5.2.4.1 Cold-Leg Injection Accumulators 
 
The accumulators (Figure 5.2-2) are pressure vessels containing borated water and 
pressurized with nitrogen.  During normal operation each accumulator is isolated 
from the RCS by two seated check valves in series.  Should the RCS pressure fall 
below the accumulator pressure, the check valves unseat, and borated water is 
immediately forced into the RCS by the expansion of the nitrogen volume.  One 
accumulator is attached to each of the cold legs of the reactor coolant system.  The 
accumulator discharge penetration into each cold leg and the downstream check 
valve in each accumulator discharge pipe are shared with the intermediate and low 
head injection systems (see Figure 5.2-1).  The accumulators are passive 
components, since mechanical operation of the swing disc check valves is the only 
action required to open the injection path from each accumulator to the core via the 
cold leg. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-5 Rev 0406 
The accumulator tank volume is approximately two thirds full of borated water; the 
remaining volume is filled with nitrogen at a pressure greater than 600 psig.  The 
boron concentration (approximately 2000 ppm) is about the same as that of the 
RWST contents.  The technical specification limits on accumulator water volume 
and nitrogen cover pressure ensure that the discharge from three accumulators is 
sufficient to rapidly refill the reactor vessel downcomer (the annular space between 
the vessel and the core barrel) and vessel bottom plenum and to begin reflooding 
the core so that core damage is limited following a design-basis LOCA.  The entire 
contents of the fourth accumulator are assumed to be completely lost via the RCS 
pipe break during the blowdown phase of the LOCA and are thus unavailable for 
core cooling.  The boron concentration limits ensure that sufficient negative 
reactivity is added to maintain post-LOCA subcriticality and ensure acceptable post-
LOCA containment recirculation sump pH values. 
 
The accumulator design basis summarized in the preceding paragraph indicates 
that all
 four accumulators must be operable (filled to the appropriate level, 
pressurized to the appropriate value, and borated to the appropriate concentration) 
when the plant is operating at power.  To ensure that no accumulator is 
inadvertently isolated and to maintain the passive nature of the system, the isolation 
valve in each accumulator=s discharge piping (valve 8808A [B,C,D] in Figure 5.2-2) 
is maintained open with power removed from its motor operator.  During a deliberate 
plant depressurization, power to the valve motor operators is temporarily restored so 
that the valves can be closed before plant pressure is less than the accumulator 
cover pressure.  The valves are then maintained shut with power removed during 
low pressure maintenance and refueling activities. 
 
Each accumulator=s nitrogen pressure can be adjusted as required during normal 
plant operation by supplying nitrogen from the plant=s nitrogen supply header or by 
venting nitrogen to the containment atmosphere.  The accumulators are isolated 
from the nitrogen supply when pressure adjustment is not in progress.  A relief valve 
on each accumulator protects it from pressures in excess of design pressure.  Each 
accumulator has redundant pressure instruments. 
 
The accumulators are located within the containment but outside of the secondary 
shield wall, which protects them from internally generated missiles.  Since the 
accumulators are located within the containment, a release of nitrogen would cause 
a small increase in containment pressure.  Releases of accumulator gas are 
detected by accumulator pressure indicators and alarms; the operator would take 
action promptly as necessary to restore accumulator parameters to within the limits 
of the technical specification covering accumulator operability.  
 
An accumulator=s water level may be adjusted either by draining accumulator 
contents to the reactor coolant drain tank or by pumping water from the RWST to 
the accumulator.  The RWST water is transferred by a safety injection pump.  Each 
accumulator has redundant level instruments. 
 
Cold leg accumulator design parameters are listed in Table 5.2-2. 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-6 Rev 0406 
Accumulator Check Valves 
 
Each accumulator check valve is designed with a low pressure drop configuration 
with all operating parts contained within the body.  The disc is permitted to rotate, 
providing a new seating surface after each valve opening.  Each valve has a test 
connection on its upstream side to permit leakage testing.  Design considerations 
and analysis which assure that leakage through both check valves in an 
accumulator injection line does not impair accumulator availability are as follows: 
 
1. During normal operation each downstream check valve is seated with an 
approximate differential pressure of 1650 psid across the disc.  Since the valve 
remains in this position except for testing or when called upon to function, and is 
not, therefore, subject to the abuses of flow operation or impact loads caused by 
sudden flow reversal and seating, it does not experience significant wear of the 
moving parts, and hence it is expected to function with minimal leakage. 
 
2. When the reactor coolant system is being pressurized during the normal plant 
heatup operation, each check valve is tested for leakage as soon as there is a 
stable differential pressure of about 100 psi or more across the valve.  This test 
confirms the seating of the disc and whether there has been an increase in 
leakage since the last test.  When the leakage testing is completed, the 
discharge line motor-operated isolation valves are opened, and the RCS 
pressure increase is continued.  There should be no increase in leakage with 
further RCS pressurization, since increasing the reactor coolant pressure 
increases the seating forces on the valve discs and decreases the probability of 
leakage. 
 
3. The accumulators can accept some in-leakage from the RCS without an effect 
on availability.  In-leakage would require, however, that the accumulator water 
volume be adjusted according to technical specification requirements.  An 
accumulator level alarm is provided as an added safeguard against excessive 
accumulator in-leakages. 
 
5.2.4.2 High Head Injection System 
 
The high head injection system (Figure 5.2-3) includes the CCPs, the boron injection 
tank (BIT), and the associated valves and piping in the flowpath from the RWST to 
the RCS cold legs.  During normal plant operations the CCPs supply charging flow 
as part of the chemical and volume control system (CVCS - Section 4.1).  Under 
accident conditions these pumps deliver water to the RCS at the prevailing RCS 
pressure.  To provide initial core cooling in response to smaller LOCAs, the high 
head injection system provides high pressure, low volume injection from the RWST 
(see section 5.2.4.3).  In addition, the system can be aligned for high pressure 
coolant recirculation to provide long-term core cooling.  In response to a steam line 
break, the injection of borated water from the RWST adds negative reactivity and 
makes up for reactor coolant contraction. 
 
Each CCP is of the multistage, diffuser design, with a barrel-type casing and vertical 
suction and discharge nozzles.  Each pump has a self-contained lubrication system 
with a shaft-driven lubricating oil pump and an oil cooler.  The lubricating oil is 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-7 Rev 0406 
cooled by service water.  The pump=s integral mechanical shaft seals are cooled by 
ambient heat loss.  Pump design parameters are listed in Table 5.2-3.  
 
A minimum flow bypass line is provided at each pump=s discharge to circulate flow 
to the volume control tank (VCT) via the seal water heat exchanger to ensure 
sufficient flow for pump cooling at or near the shutoff head.  The charging pumps 
may be tested during normal operation through the use of the minimum flow bypass 
lines. 
 
A safety injection actuation signal initiates the following actions in the high head 
injection system:  
 
1. Both CCPs receive start signals.  An already running pump continues to run. 
 
2. The motor-operated suction isolation valves from the RWST (112D, 112E) open, 
and the suction isolation valves from the VCT (112B, 112C) subsequently shut.  
The charging pump suctions are thus aligned to the RWST. 
 
3. The motor-operated BIT outlet valves (8801A, 8801B) open to align the pump 
discharge to the cold-leg injection paths.  The BIT inlet valves (8803A, 8803B) 
are already open with power removed.  The high head injection penetrations into 
the cold legs are separate from those of the other ECCSs.  
 
(The normal charging, letdown, and seal return flowpaths in the CVCS isolate as 
well.)  The high head injection system operates in this configuration until the lineup 
is changed by the reactor operator.  The discharge pressure of the CCPs is 
sufficient to provide flow to the RCS for any postulated size break.  The pumps can 
deliver flow under all pressure conditions up to and including the pressurizer safety 
valve lift pressure.  At very low RCS pressures, the two high head injection trains 
deliver a combined flow rate of up to several hundred gpm. 
 
As shown in Figure 5.2-1, the discharge of the RHR pumps is manually aligned to 
the CCP suctions in order to circulate water from the containment recirculation sump 
to the RCS cold legs at high pressures (see section 5.2.5).  The discharge from the 
A train RHR pump is provided directly to the CCP suctions; the discharge from the B 
train RHR pump is available to the CCP suctions via the cross-connection to the 
safety injection pump suction piping. 
 
In addition to providing core cooling flow during accident conditions, operation of the 
high head injection system is part of a last-resort method of cooling the core known 
as bleed and feed, which is used when heat transfer from the reactor coolant to the 
steam generators is unavailable.  For this cooling method, flow through the core is 
delivered by the CCPs and displaced out the intentionally opened power-operated 
pressurizer relief valves. 
 
Boron Injection Tank (BIT) 
 
The BIT is a 900-gal tank in the CCP discharge piping that was originally intended to 
contain highly borated (20,000- to 22,500-ppm) water that would be immediately 
injected into the RCS upon actuation of the high head injection system.  The original 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-8 Rev 0406 
design basis of the BIT and its contents was to provide sufficient negative reactivity 
to maintain core subcriticality during a worst-case RCS cooldown accident (main 
steam line break).  A reanalysis of the cooldown accident without the highly borated 
BIT contents revealed that, although the core could regain criticality, core damage 
would be avoided.  As a result, most Westinghouse reactor plants have eliminated 
the requirement for the high boron concentration in the BIT.  (The boron 
concentration in the high head injection piping is the same as that in the RWST up 
to the normally closed BIT outlet valves.)  At some plants the BIT has been removed 
or bypassed; at others, including the course reference plant, the tank physically 
remains in the high head injection flowpath. 
 
The former high boron concentration of the BIT contents necessitated several 
auxiliary components.  To prevent cold spots and stratification within the tank during 
normal operation, the contents of the BIT were continuously recirculated by BIT 
recirculation pumps.  The BIT inlet pipe incorporated a sparger to keep the boric 
acid solution well mixed.  Redundant tank heaters and line heat tracing were 
provided to ensure that the solution was stored at a temperature high enough 
(normally greater than 135EF) to keep the boric acid in solution.  The BIT and the 
recirculation piping were isolated from the rest of the high head injection system 
during normal operation by normally closed BIT inlet and outlet valves; both sets of 
valves were opened by a safety injection actuation.  In the course reference plant 
the very high boron concentration in the BIT is no longer maintained, and all BIT 
auxiliary equipment except the sparger has been removed.  Because isolation of BIT 
recirculation piping is no longer necessary, the motor-operated BIT inlet valves are 
maintained de-energized in the open position.  
 
Boron injection tank design parameters are listed in Table 5.2-4.   
 
5.2.4.3 Refueling Water Storage Tank  
 
The RWST is a very large (438,000-gal capacity) seismically qualified tank 
containing borated (greater than 2000-ppm) water.  The tank contents are used to 
fill the refueling cavity for refueling operations and to provide water for ECCS and 
containment spray system operation.  During normal operation, the RWST is always 
aligned through open isolation valves to the suctions of the safety injection, RHR, 
and containment spray pumps.  As indicated in the previous section, the CCP 
suctions switch from the VCT to the RWST with a safety injection actuation signal. 
 
The minimum water volume (428,000 gal) and boron concentration required by the 
RWST technical specification ensure: 
 
1. Sufficient coolant to support ECCS operation during the injection phase (see 
section 5.2.5), 
 
2. Sufficient water volume in the containment recirculation sump to support 
continued ECCS and containment spray system operation during the 
recirculation phase (see section 5.2.5), and 
 
3. Maintaining core subcriticality following a LOCA. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-9 Rev 0406 
Electric heaters in the tank keep the water temperature above the boron solubility 
limit.  RWST design parameters are listed in Table 5.2-5. 
 
The RWST has four redundant level transmitters which provide indication in the 
control room, alarms, and control actions.  At the low-level (48%) setpoint (119,000 
remaining usable gallons), the RHR pumps automatically trip, and the operators 
align the ECCSs for cold-leg recirculation of coolant from the recirculation sump.  
Realigning for recirculation at the low-level setpoint ensures that vortexing does not 
occur in the RWST, and that there is sufficient water in the recirculation sump to 
provide adequate suction head for the RHR pumps.  At the low-low-level (17%) 
setpoint (78,000 remaining usable gallons), the containment spray pumps 
automatically trip, and the operators then manually complete the recirculation 
alignment of the engineered safety features (ESF) equipment by shifting the 
containment spray pump suctions to the recirculation sump.  The additional water 
sprayed into containment by the containment spray system as the RWST empties 
between the low-level and low-low-level setpoints ensures a sufficiently basic pH in 
the sump water. 
 
During normal operating conditions backflow from the RCS into the RWST is 
prevented by seated check valves in the unisolated discharge paths.  When the 
RHR system is placed into operation during an RCS cooldown, the RHR pump 
suctions are isolated from the RWST by a motor-operated valve (8812) in addition to 
a check valve (see Figure 5.2-5). 
 
5.2.4.4 Intermediate Head Injection (Safety Injection) System  
 
The intermediate head injection system (Figure 5.2-4), also referred to as the safety 
injection system, includes two safety injection pumps and the associated valves and 
piping in the flowpaths from the RWST to the RCS cold and hot legs.  The system is 
designed to provide water from the RWST to the RCS in the case of a relatively 
small break in which the RCS pressure remains high (above the accumulator 
pressure and the RHR pump shutoff head) for a relatively long period.  In addition, 
the system is aligned for coolant recirculation to both the hot and cold legs to 
provide long-term core cooling at intermediate coolant pressures.    
 
Each safety injection pump is a multistage centrifugal pump, driven directly by an 
induction motor.  Each pump has a self-contained lubrication system and a 
mechanical seal cooling system.  The lubricating oil cooler is cooled by service 
water, and the seals are cooled by component cooling water.  Safety injection pump 
design parameters are listed in Table 5.2-6. 
 
The system is aligned during normal operation with unisolated suction and 
discharge paths.  Upon receipt of a safety injection actuation signal, the pumps start 
and recirculate water to the RWST until the RCS pressure decreases below the 
pump shutoff head.  Once the RCS pressure is below the pump shutoff head, the 
pumps inject at a flow rate of up to several hundred gpm per pump (increasing as 
the RCS pressure decreases) through a common discharge header that branches to 
all four cold legs of the RCS.  The intermediate head injection discharge penetration 
into each cold leg and the downstream check valve in each cold leg injection path 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-10 Rev 0406 
are shared with the accumulator discharge piping and the low head injection system 
(see Figure 5.2-1). 
 
A minimum flow bypass line is provided at each pump=s discharge to circulate flow 
to the RWST during low pump flow conditions.  These lines also permit pump testing 
during normal operation.  Two normally open motor-operated valves (8813, 8814) 
are provided in the recirculation path to the RWST.  These valves are closed by the 
operator during the recirculation mode to prevent the diversion of radioactive fluid to 
the vented RWST. 
 
As shown in Figure 5.2-1, the discharge of the RHR pumps can be manually aligned 
to the safety injection pump suctions in order to recirculate water from the 
containment recirculation sump to the RCS cold legs at pressures above the RHR 
pump shutoff head (see section 5.2.5).  The discharge from the B train RHR pump is 
provided directly to the safety injection pump suctions; the discharge from the A train 
RHR pump is available to the safety injection pump suctions via the cross-
connection to the CCP suction piping.  After many hours of cold-leg recirculation, the 
safety injection system is manually realigned for hot-leg recirculation by opening the 
hot-leg injection isolation valves (8802A, 8802B) and closing the cold-leg injection 
isolation valves (8821A, 8821B, 8835).  The suction source for hot-leg recirculation 
remains the discharge of the RHR pumps. 
 
While the system is in its standby alignment, backflow from the RCS into the safety 
injection system is prevented by two check valves in series in each injection 
flowpath.  A piping connection on the upstream side of each valve permits leakage 
testing during outages. 
 
A safety injection pump is aligned for accumulator fill operations when necessary via 
a piping branch upstream of the A train hot-leg injection isolation valve.  
Accumulator filling is the only non-accident function of the system. 
 
5.2.4.5 Low Head Injection System  
 
The low head injection system (Figure 5.2-5) is designed to provide low pressure, 
high volume injection from the RWST to the four RCS cold legs for large RCS pipe 
breaks up to and including the design-basis LOCA, in which the RCS pressure 
decreases to containment pressure in a relatively short period of time.  In addition, 
the system provides long-term core cooling following a LOCA via the recirculation 
and cooling of water collected in the containment recirculation sump. 
 
The low head injection system utilizes the RHR pumps to deliver water from the 
RWST or the containment recirculation sump to the RCS.  Each RHR pump is a 
single-stage, vertical centrifugal pump.  It has an integral shaft driven by an 
induction motor.  The unit has a self-contained mechanical seal, which is cooled by 
component cooling water.  The RHR pumps and the nonaccident functions of the 
RHR system are discussed in Section 5.1.  
 
The system is aligned during normal operation with unisolated suction and 
discharge paths.  Upon receipt of a safety injection actuation signal, the RHR pumps 
start and recirculate water through the uncooled RHR heat exchangers (via valves 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-11 Rev 0406 
610 and 611) until the RCS pressure decreases below the pump shutoff head.  
Once the RCS pressure is below the pump shutoff head (approximately 200 psid), 
the pumps inject at a flow rate of up to several thousand gpm (increasing as the 
RCS pressure decreases) through discharge headers to all four cold legs of the 
RCS.  Each of the two discharge headers provides flow to two cold legs; the 
headers are cross-connected to ensure that each low head injection train can 
provide flow to all cold legs.  The low head injection discharge penetration into each 
cold leg and the downstream check valve in each cold leg injection path are shared 
with the accumulator discharge piping and the intermediate head injection system 
(see Figure 5.2-1). 
 
When the RWST has emptied to the low-level setpoint (48%), the suctions of the 
RHR pumps are manually realigned to the containment recirculation sump for 
recirculation of the sump water to the RCS.  The cold-leg recirculation lineup is 
completed by opening the component cooling water supplies to the RHR heat 
exchangers and by opening the RHR pump discharge paths to the suctions of the 
CCPs and safety injection pumps (via valves 8804A, 8804B).  After many hours of 
cold-leg recirculation, the low head injection system is manually aligned for hot-leg 
recirculation by realigning the injection flowpaths from the cold legs to two of the four 
hot legs (see Figure 5.2-5).  The low head injection discharge penetrations into the 
hot legs are shared with the intermediate head injection system (see Figure 5.2-1).  
During hot-leg recirculation, the RHR pumps remain the suction source for the 
higher headed ECCSs. 
 
While the system is in its standby alignment, backflow from the RCS into the low 
head injection system is prevented by two check valves in series in each injection 
flowpath.  A piping connection on the upstream side of each valve permits leakage 
testing during outages. 
 
5.2.4.6 Containment Recirculation Sump  
 
The containment recirculation sump (Figures 5.2-6 and 5.2-7) is a large collection 
reservoir designed to provide an adequate water supply to the ECCSs and 
containment spray system during recirculation modes of operation.  The water 
collected in the sump is reactor coolant lost through an RCS pipe break as well as 
water that has been injected from the RWST into the RCS and then through the 
pipe break.  Sump design features limit the size of debris that can enter the 
recirculation flowpaths and ensure an adequate net positive suction head (NPSH) 
for the containment spray and RHR pumps.  It should be noted that the course 
reference recirculation sump described in this section can differ significantly from 
the sumps at other Westinghouse plants. 
 
The sump is located at a low level in containment outside the biological shield. The 
sump is covered by a sheet metal roof and is surrounded on the sides by bars and 
screens; the fine screen mesh size of 3/16 in. limits the size of floating debris that 
can become entrained in the suction piping from the sump.  The bar and screen 
arrangement can withstand clogging of 50% of the incoming flow area without 
significantly degrading the NPSH for the RHR and containment spray pumps.  The 
sump has an 18-in.-high baffle along its floor which is located between the suction 
pipes for the two trains of ESF equipment.  Two level switches supply indicating 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-12 Rev 0406 
lights in the control room.  When the RWST level has reached the low-low-level 
setpoint following an accident, the fluid elevation in containment should be 13 ft 
above the sump floor. 
 
Two suction pipes penetrate the recirculation sump walls; each pipe supplies one 
train of low head injection and one train of containment spray.  The suction piping is 
oriented horizontally through the sump and is sufficiently submerged to limit 
vortexing.  Each suction pipe contains a normally open motor-operated isolation 
valve that is also within the sump confines; each valve=s motor operator is mounted 
atop the sump=s roof and remains above the water level following collection of the 
RWST contents.  The suction piping branches to the RHR and containment spray 
pumps outside containment; four normally closed suction isolation valves (one for 
each RHR and containment spray pump) isolate the recirculation sump from the 
ECCSs and containment spray system when the systems are in their standby 
alignments.  The suction isolation valves are manually opened as part of the 
realignment of the systems to the cold-leg recirculation mode. 
 
The sump dimensions, the materials used in the fabrication of the sump, the suction 
piping, and the isolation valves are designed to provide assurance that the sump will 
remain functional for long-term coolant recirculation during the existence of the post-
accident environment. 
 
The course reference plant ceased operations in the early 1990s; significantly 
revised containment recirculation sump strainer designs have been implemented at 
operating plants since then.  A major concern has been the potential blockage of 
recirculation sump strainers by post-accident debris.  Generic Letter 2004-02, 
“Potential Impact of Debris Blockage on Emergency Recirculation during Design 
Basis Accidents at Pressurized-Water Reactors,” required licensees to perform, in 
part, an evaluation of the potential for sump strainer blockage to impede or prevent 
recirculation of sump contents by safety systems.  In accordance with their 
responses to the generic letter, almost all PWR licensees have adopted sump 
screen modifications which have greatly increased the effective surface areas for 
post-accident recirculation flows.  A large strainer surface area ensures that, even 
with extensive strainer blockage, the remaining unblocked suction flow area is 
sufficient to support recirculation safety functions. 
 
Two such modifications are illustrated in Figures 5-8 and 5-9.  Figure 5-8 shows the 
pocket-screen technology of Control Components Incorporated, which involves 
banks of cheese-grater-shaped cartridges at the inlets to pump suction piping.  The 
large strainer surface area is provided by the dimensions and contours of the 
cartridges.  Figure 5-9 illustrates the “Sure-Flow Strainer” of Performance 
Contracting Incorporated.  That design also involves banks of strainer elements in 
the suction piping inlets.  Each element provides a large surface area for flow via a 
collection of thin perforated plates which feed a central core tube.   
 
 
5.2.5 Emergency Core Cooling Systems Integrated Operations  
 
The operation of the emergency core cooling systems following a LOCA can be 
divided into three distinct modes of operation, summarized as follows:  
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-13 Rev 0406 
1. The injection mode, in which borated water is injected into the RCS from the 
accumulators and from the RWST by the high, intermediate, and low head 
injection systems, provided that the RCS pressure is low enough for the lower 
headed systems to inject.  The injected water provides initial core cooling by 
refilling the reactor vessel and reflooding the core.  The injected boron adds to 
the post-accident shutdown margin. 
 
2. The cold-leg recirculation mode, in which the suction of the low head injection 
system is aligned to the containment recirculation sump, from which the collected 
water is recirculated to the core via the RCS cold legs.  The recirculated water is 
cooled in the RHR heat exchangers.  The discharge of the low head injection 
(RHR) pumps is also directed to the suctions of the higher headed ECCS pumps; 
the discharge from those pumps completes the recirculation path for high 
prevailing RCS pressures.  The recirculated, cooled water from the containment 
recirculation sump maintains post-accident core cooling. 
 
3. The hot-leg recirculation mode, in which the discharge of the intermediate and 
low head injection pumps is realigned to the RCS hot legs to reverse the 
direction of flow through the core and to continue long-term cooling.  The ECCS 
suction source during hot-leg recirculation remains the containment recirculation 
sump. 
 
Injection Mode 
 
The injection mode of emergency core cooling is initiated by a safety injection 
actuation signal.  This signal is actuated in response to any of the following: 
  
$ Low pressurizer pressure, 
$ High containment pressure, 
$ High steam flow, coincident with either low-low T
avg or low steam pressure, 
$ High steam line differential pressure, or  
$ Manual actuation.  
 
These signals are discussed in detail in Section 12.3. 
 
Operation of the emergency core cooling systems during the injection mode is 
completely automatic.  The safety injection actuation signal starts the ECCS pumps 
(usually via a sequencer which starts the pumps at different times), realigns the 
CCP suction and discharge paths for high head injection, and realigns auxiliary 
cooling systems as necessary to support post-accident operation of the ECCS 
equipment.  Realignment of the intermediate and low head injection systems is 
unnecessary.  Actuations and realignments of other ESF equipment by the safety 
injection actuation are discussed in Section 12.3. 
 
Following a large RCS pipe rupture, the RCS is depressurized and voided of coolant 
rapidly.  A high flow rate of emergency coolant is required to quickly cover the 
exposed fuel rods and to limit possible core damage.  This high flow is provided 
initially by the discharge from the passive cold-leg accumulators, which rapidly refill 
the reactor vessel downcomer and vessel bottom plenum and begin to reflood the 
core.  Reflooding of the core is subsequently completed by injection from the 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-14 Rev 0406 
centrifugal charging (high head injection) pumps, safety injection (intermediate head 
injection) pumps, and RHR (low head injection) pumps.  These pumps inject to the 
RCS cold legs as soon as they start and begin to develop sufficient discharge 
pressure.  The pumps are started in order from highest to lowest discharge head.  
The suction source for all of the active systems is the RWST. 
 
The order of ECCS injection is different for smaller RCS pipe ruptures.  An SBLOCA 
results in a gradual depressurization of the reactor coolant.  In response, each 
ECCS pump begins to deliver water from the RWST to the cold legs once the 
reactor coolant pressure has decreased to below the pump =s shutoff head, and the 
accumulators begin to discharge to the cold legs once the coolant pressure is less 
than the nitrogen cover pressure.  Hence, the ECCSs begin to inject in order of 
decreasing discharge capability: the high head injection system first, the 
intermediate head injection system second, the accumulators third, and the low 
head injection system last. 
 
If the size of the rupture is small enough, the coolant depressurization stops when 
the rate of inventory addition by the ECCSs equals the rate of inventory loss.  An 
equilibrium coolant pressure can be reached with just the high head injection system 
injecting, or with just the high and intermediate head injection systems injecting.  In 
such a case further coolant depressurization requires operator action. 
 
The injection mode continues until the RWST level reaches the low-level setpoint, at 
which time the operator changes the ECCS alignment for operation in the cold-leg 
recirculation mode.  
 
Cold-Leg Recirculation Mode 
 
The details of transfer from the injection mode to the recirculation mode of operation 
are plant specific.  At plants where a portion of the transfer is automatic, the suction 
supply to the low head injection pumps is automatically switched from the RWST to 
the containment recirculation sump.  For the course reference plant, the change in 
suction supplies is a manual operation directed by the emergency operating 
procedures.  In any case, the transfer from the injection mode to the recirculation 
mode takes place well before the RWST is empty, so that until the transfer is 
complete, the remaining RWST contents provide adequate net positive suction head 
to running ECCS pumps. 
 
For the course reference plant, the RHR pumps automatically stop when the RWST 
reaches the low-level setpoint (48%).  Operators are then directed by procedure to 
establish component cooling water flow to the RHR heat exchangers, to isolate the 
RHR suctions from the RWST, to open the RHR suctions from the containment 
recirculation sump, and to then restart the RHR pumps.  At this point, the water 
collected in the recirculation sump is available for cooling and recirculation to the 
RCS for long-term core cooling.  If the reactor coolant pressure is below the shutoff 
head of the low head injection pumps, they will provide cooled water directly to the 
RCS cold legs via the low head injection discharge piping. 
 
In the event of a smaller RCS rupture, in which the coolant depressurization 
proceeds slowly, the reactor coolant pressure may still exceed the shutoff head of 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-15 Rev 0406 
the low head injection pumps at the onset of recirculation.  In this case, the low head 
injection pump discharge (cooled water from the recirculation sump) must be aligned 
to the suction piping of the centrifugal charging pumps and the safety injection 
pumps so that those pumps can inject it into the RCS at higher pressure and thus 
maintain core cooling (see Figure 5.2-1).  This alignment is referred to as high 
pressure recirculation or as Apiggyback@ operation.  The completion of the piggyback 
realignment includes manually shutting the high and intermediate head pump 
recirculation valves and isolating the RWST suctions to those pumps.  A manually 
unisolated cross connection between the centrifugal charging pump and safety 
injection pump suctions ensures that either low head injection train can supply flow 
to both of the higher headed systems.  The ECCS piggyback alignment is typically 
directed by procedure at the initiation of cold-leg recirculation regardless of reactor 
coolant pressure. 
 
Hot-Leg Recirculation Mode 
 
Approximately 24 hours (course reference plant value) after the switchover to cold-
leg recirculation, hot-leg recirculation is initiated.  In this manually initiated mode of 
operation, the low head injection paths to the RCS cold legs are isolated, and the 
injection paths to two of the four hot legs are opened.  Also, the intermediate head 
injection paths to the cold legs are isolated, and the injection paths to all four hot 
legs are opened.  The suction sources for all ECCS pumps are unchanged from the 
cold-leg recirculation alignment, and the high head injection system continues to 
discharge to the cold legs.  Hot-leg recirculation thus reverses the direction of much 
of the coolant flow delivered to the core. 
 
Hot-leg recirculation is implemented to terminate boiling in the core and to prevent 
boron precipitation in the core following a large cold-leg break.  For such a break, 
core decay heat boils off much of the injected water while the nonvolatile injected 
boron concentrates in the vicinity of the fuel assemblies.  Cold-leg injection is not 
effective in countering core boil-off because the vessel downcomer level is low, 
injection flow primarily fills the downcomer and not the core region, and Aflushing@ of 
the core does not occur.  With the direction of coolant flow reversed, hot-leg 
recirculation terminates boil-off and dilutes the concentrated boric acid solution in 
the vessel with the less concentrated solution recirculated from the containment 
sump.  The switchover to hot-leg recirculation is initiated before the boron solubility 
limit of the reactor vessel water is exceeded, so that boron does not plate out on fuel 
cladding and interfere with decay heat removal.  An additional benefit of hot-leg 
recirculation is the quenching of any steam bubble that remains in the vessel. 
 
Transferring to hot-leg recirculation is not necessary for all types of LOCAs.  For a 
hot-leg break, cold-leg recirculation flow passes through the core and spills through 
the break with little resistance.  The core is thus flushed without boron buildup.  
However, hot-leg recirculation would be implemented whenever the initiation 
conditions are reached so that the implementing procedure is not event specific. 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-16 Rev 0406 
5.2.5 PRA Insights  
 
For the purposes of a typical PRA, the high pressure portion of the ECCSs includes 
both the centrifugal charging pumps and the safety injection pumps.  The low 
pressure portion involves only the RHR pumps. 
 
NUREG-1150 indicates that the LOCA initiator is a major contributor to core damage 
frequency (59% for Sequoyah, 28% for Surry, and 18% for Zion).  The major failures 
in the LOCA sequences that lead to core damage include either the failure of the 
high pressure ECCSs in the recirculation mode or the failure of the low pressure 
ECCS in the recirculation mode.  The loss of the recirculation capability allows the 
core to continue to heat up and any remaining coolant to boil off, resulting in core 
damage. 
 
Probable causes of failure of an ECCS function include: 
 
1. Failure to shift the high pressure systems from the injection to the recirculation 
mode. 
2. Failure of the high pressure injection discharge isolation valves to open. 
3. Failure of room cooling for the high pressure injection pumps. 
4. Failure to shift from cold-leg to hot-leg recirculation. 
5. Failure to shift the low pressure system from the injection to the recirculation 
mode. 
6. Failure of the low pressure recirculation sump suction isolation valves to open. 
7. Failure of the RWST suction isolation valves for the low pressure injection 
system to close. 
8. Failure of the operators to properly realign an ECCS after testing. 
9. Failure of the low pressure injection pumps to start. 
 
NUREG-1150 studies on importance measures have shown that the ECCSs can be 
major contributors to both risk reduction and risk achievement.  Specifically, the core 
damage frequency is most sensitive to increases in the probabilities of component 
faults and of operator errors associated with establishing recirculation from the 
containment sump.  The greatest reductions in core damage frequencies are 
achieved by reducing the frequencies of initiating events and the probabilities of 
operator errors and valve failures. 
 
In current risk-informed notebooks for operating plants, safety functions provided by 
the ECCSs appear in many core damage sequences.  Failures of the high pressure 
injection, low pressure injection, accumulator injection, low pressure recirculation, 
and high pressure recirculation safety functions are involved in core damage 
sequences associated with the LOCA initiators.  Because of their roles in the bleed 
and feed method of core cooling, the failures of the high pressure injection and high 
pressure recirculation safety functions appear in core damage sequences in which 
all decay heat removal options are lost (i.e., auxiliary feedwater, main feedwater, 
and bleed and feed cooling have all failed). 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-17 Rev 0406 
5.2.6 Summary  
 
The emergency core cooling systems are designed to provide post-accident core 
cooling. The ECCSs are designed in accordance with the General Design Criteria of 
10 CFR 50, Appendix A, and they must meet the acceptance requirements of 10 
CFR 50.46.  They are designed to withstand a single failure by providing 100% 
redundancy in components and system flowpaths. 
 
The ECCSs include both passive and active systems.  The passive system is 
comprised of the cold-leg injection accumulators.  The active systems include the 
high head injection (centrifugal charging pumps), intermediate head injection (safety 
injection pumps), and the low head injection (RHR pumps) systems.  
 
All active components are actuated by a safety injection actuation signal, which 
originates from the reactor protection system (see Section 12.3).  
 
The order of ECCS injection into the reactor coolant system following a LOCA is 
dependent on the size of the rupture.  Following a large rupture, the passive 
accumulators inject first, followed by the active pumping systems.  A small rupture is 
characterized by a slow rate of coolant pressure reduction, during which the ECCSs 
inject in order from highest to lowest discharge pressure capability: high head 
injection, intermediate head injection, accumulators, and low head injection.  
 
The RWST is the suction source for all active systems following actuation.  A low 
level in the RWST signals the end of the injection mode of operation.  Cold-leg 
recirculation is then initiated manually or with partial automation.  Cold-leg 
recirculation initiates long-term core cooling.  Hot-leg recirculation is initiated many 
hours after the onset of a LOCA to alleviate concerns with the potential buildup of 
boron in the core. 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 5.2-18 Rev 0406 
 
 
Table 5.2-1 
Normal Operating Status of Emergency Core Cooling System Components 
 
Number of charging pumps operable        2 
Number of safety injection pumps operable      2 
Number of residual heat removal pumps operable    2 
Number of residual heat removal heat exchangers operable  2 
Minimum refueling water storage tank volume, gal.        428,000 
Boron concentration in refueling water storage tank, ppm      2,000 - 2,500 
Number of cold leg accumulators            4 
Cold leg accumulator water volume, ft
3           870 - 930 
Cold leg accumulator pressure, psig            600 - 650 
Minimum boron concentration in cold leg accumulators, ppm     1,900 
 
 
 
 
Table 5.2-2 
Accumulator Design Parameters 
 
N u m b e r                4  
Design pressure, psig       700 
Design temperature, EF           300 
Operating temperature, EF          100-150 
Normal operating pressure, psig    650 
Minimum operating pressure, psig   600 
Total volume, gal        10,100 ea. 
Minimum water volume, gal     6,500 ea. 
Boric acid concentration, minimum ppm  1,900  
 
 
 
 
Table 5.2-3 
Centrifugal Charging Pump Design Parameters 
 
Number                     2 
Design pressure, psig             2,800 
Design temperature, EF                 300 
Design flow rate, gpm                 150 
Developed head at maximum flow rate, psig 1,400 
Shutoff head, psig                  2,670  
 
---PAGE---
  
USNRC Technical Training Center  5.2-19   Rev 0406                     
 
 
Table 5.2-4 
Boron Injection Tank Design Parameters 
 
N u m b e r             1  
Total volume, gal     900 
Boric acid concentration, ppm      1,900-2,000 
Design pressure, psig    2,735 
Design temperature, EF         300 
Operating temperature, EF       150-180 
 
 
 
 
Table 5.2-5 
Refueling Water Storage Tank Design Parameters 
 
N u m b e r              1  
Total volume, gal     438,000 
Minimum volume, gal         428,000 
Boric acid concentration, ppm       2,000 - 2,500 
Normal pressure           Atmospheric 
Operating temperature, EF        37 - 90 
Design temperature (Tank),EF       200 
 
 
 
 
Table 5.2-6 
Safety Injection Pump Design Parameters 
 
N u m b e r               2  
Design pressure, psig          1,700 
Design temperature, EF              300 
Design flow rate, gpm          425 
Developed head at maximum flow rate, psig   650 
Shutoff head, psig           1,520 
 
---PAGE---
  
 
---PAGE---
  
 
 

---PAGE---
  
 
 

---PAGE---
  
 
 

---PAGE---
  
 
 
---PAGE---
  

---PAGE---
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
  
 
 
---PAGE---
  
 
 
---PAGE---
  
 
 
 
---PAGE---
