 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 11.1 
 
Steam Generator Water Level Control System
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 11.1-i Rev 0706 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
11.1 STEAM GENERATOR WATER LEVEL CONTROL SYSTEM ................ 11.1-1 
 
11.1.1 Introduction .................................................................................. 11.1-1 
 
11.1.2 System Description ...................................................................... 11.1-2 
 
11.1.2.1 Feedwater C ontrol System........................................... 11.1-2 
11.1.2.2 Main Feedwater Pump Speed Control System ............ 11.1-4 
 
11.1.3 Instrument ation ............................................................................ 11.1-4 
 
11.1.3.1 Level Channels ............................................................ 11.1-4 
11.1.3.2 Turbine First-Stage Pressure ....................................... 11.1-5 
11.1.3.3 Steam Flow  Channels .................................................. 11.1-5 
11.1.3.4 Feedwater Flow Channels ........................................... 11.1-5 
11.1.3.5 Steam Pressu re Channels ........................................... 11.1-6 
11.1.3.6 Feedwater Pressure Channel ...................................... 11.1-6 
 
11.1.4 System Interrelationships ............................................................. 11.1-6 
 
11.1.5 Summary  ...................................................................................... 11.1-7 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
11.1-1 ................................................................................ Feedwater Control System 
11.1-2 ................................................................... Steam Generator Shrink and Swell 
11.1-3 ............................................................... Main Feedwater Pump Speed Control 
11.1-4 ............................................................................. Steam Generator Level Data 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 11.1-1 Rev 0706 
11.1 STEAM GENERATOR WATER LEVEL CONTROL SYSTEM  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. State the purposes of the Steam Generator Water Level Control System. 
 
2. List the Reactor Protection System and turbine trip inputs provided by steam 
generator instrumentation, and state the purpose of each trip. 
 
3. List the inputs used in the feedwater control system.  Describe how and why 
each input is used. 
 
4. List the inputs used in the main feed pump speed control system.  Describe how 
and why each input is used. 
 
 
11.1.1 Introduction  
 
The purposes of the steam generator water level control system are as follows: 
 
1. To control feedwater flow to maintain the programmed levels in the steam 
generators, and 
2. To control the main feed pump speed to maintain the programmed main feed 
regulating valve differential pressure. 
 
Additionally, the steam generator instrumentation provides inputs into the reactor 
protection system for loss of heat sink protection and inputs into the turbine trip 
system for equipment protection.  
 
The steam generator water level control system involves two separate control 
systems for regulating feedwater flow to the steam generators.  The feedwater 
control system, which controls steam generator level from 20% to 100% power, 
modulates the positions of the 14-inch main feed regulating valves.  This control 
system is provided with inputs of main steam flow, main feedwater flow, actual level, 
and reference level (programmed as a function of turbine impulse pressure).  Below 
20% power, feedwater flow is controlled through manual operation of the 6-inch feed 
regulating bypass valves.   
 
The main feed pump speed control system is utilized above 20% power to control 
the speed of the main feed pumps.  Appropriate control of feed pump speed 
maintains each feed regulating valve near the midpoint of its travel.  The feed pump 
speed control system does not directly control the levels of the steam generators.  
The inputs provided for feed pump speed control are main steam header pressure, 
main feed header pressure, and a programmed reference differential pressure ( ΔP).  
  
The reactor protection system is provided with several inputs from the detectors 
used in the steam generator water level control system.  The inputs are used for the 
generation of reactor trips and engineered safety features actuations.  The reactor 
protection system also generates feedwater isolation signals, which affect the 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 11.1-2 Rev 0706 
operation of feedwater system components.  Inputs from steam generator 
instrumentation are also provided to the turbine trip system for turbine protection. 
 
 
11.1.2 System Description  
 
The steam generator water level control system utilizes the inputs from various 
detectors to control the feedwater flow to maintain programmed levels in the steam 
generators.  The following sections provide a detailed discussion of each of the 
control systems involved. 
 
11.1.2.1 Feedwater Control System  
 
The feedwater control system for one steam generator is shown in Figure 11.1-1.  
Each steam generator has an identical system.  The feedwater control system 
utilizes the following inputs for controlling the position of the main feed regulating 
valve: 
 
$ One of two pressure-compensated steam flow channels (selectable), 
$ One of two feedwater flow channels (selectable), 
$ An actual steam generator level channel (no alternate channel available), and 
$ A programmed level generated by one of the turbine first-stage pressure 
channels. 
 
For an accurate measure of the steam flow rate, a pressure-compensated steam 
flow signal is required.  The mass flow rate of the steam is dependent on the density 
of the steam.  Since steam is a compressible fluid, the density is a function of the 
steam pressure.  Feedwater flow does not require density compensation because 
water is an incompressible fluid.  These two flow signals are compared to produce a 
flow error signal, which is combined with the level error signal as the input to the 
feed regulating valve controller.  The flow signals are also compared to provide 
steam flow/feed flow mismatch alarms. 
 
The level error signal is derived from the comparison of the actual level signal with 
the programmed level.  The programmed level is generated by turbine first-stage 
(impulse) pressure.  Since impulse pressure is proportional to power, the steam 
generator levels are effectively programmed with power level.   
 
The programmed level varies linearly from hot zero power (33% narrow-range level 
indication) to 20% power (44% narrow-range level indication).  The programmed 
level is a constant 44% from 20% power to 100% power.  The 33% to 44% ramp in 
the level program at low powers minimizes the consequences of a steam line break 
inside the containment.  The 44% maximum program level satisfies the following 
considerations: 
 
$ The Ashrink@ in steam generator water level during a 50% (maximum design) 
load reduction will not cause a reactor trip on low-low steam generator level, 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 11.1-3 Rev 0706 
$ The Aswell@ in steam generator water level during a 10% step load increase 
will not cause water in the steam generator downcomer to back up into the 
moisture separators, and 
 
$ The peak containment pressure resulting from the blowdown of one steam 
generator=s entire inventory during a steam line break is limited. 
 
The actual level signal is first conditioned by a lag unit to delay the input of level 
error to level control during the initial stages of a transient.  Lagging the actual level 
signal prevents shrink and swell effects from masking actual steam generator 
inventory changes and thus allows the flow error to initially control the feed 
regulating valve position during a transient.  The actual level is then subtracted from 
the programmed level to generate the level error. 
 
The level error is the input signal to a proportional-plus-integral (PI) controller.  The 
proportional section amplifies the error signal.  The integral portion adds to the 
controller=s output as long as a level error persists, thereby making level error 
increasingly dominant.  The time constant associated with the integral portion of the 
controller is two minutes, which allows the flow error to initially control water level 
and prevents rapid responses to level errors.  The integrated level error also 
prevents an offset in level that could result from calibration errors in steam or feed 
flow detectors. 
 
The output of the PI level controller is sent to the total error controller, where it is 
combined with the flow error.  The flow error is generated by subtracting feed flow 
from steam flow.  The output of the total error controller (also a PI controller) is used 
to position the main feed regulating valve.  An opening signal to the valve results 
when either (1) the actual level is less than the programmed level or (2) feed flow is 
less than steam flow.  A closing signal results from one of the converse conditions.  
  
A load change affects steam flow and steam generator level.  However, the control 
action caused by the level change would initially be in the wrong direction.  For 
example, using Figure 11.1-2, during a load increase, steam flow increases; this 
action by itself produces a corresponding increase in feedwater flow.  However, a 
load increase also causes an increase in steam generator level.  This increase in 
level is called a swell (a temporary effect due to the measurement of level in the 
downcomer).  This increase in level by itself would produce a decrease in feedwater 
flow (an undesirable effect).  To prevent this undesired action, the lagged actual 
level signal and the large time constant of the PI level controller limit the effect of the 
swell on the total error controller.  Therefore, the flow error increases feed flow, 
which is the desired response.  Once the actual level signal passes through the lag 
unit and any appreciable level error has been integrated for some time, the level 
error will dominate, and the actual level will be returned to the programmed level.   
 
During a load decrease the opposite of the load increase occurs; in a load decrease 
case, the actual level in the steam generator level decreases for a short period.  
This phenomenon is called a shrink.  Once again, the control system features allow 
the flow error to produce the initial desired response of reducing feedwater flow 
before the level error input returns the actual level in the steam generator to the 
programmed setpoint. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 11.1-4 Rev 0706 
11.1.2.2 Main Feedwater Pu mp Speed Control System 
 
Each main feed regulating valve is a throttling valve with linear flow characteristics 
throughout its travel.  However, the best characteristics for flow control result when 
the valve position is somewhat near the midpoint of valve travel, or from about 25% 
open to 75% open.  To maintain the valve position in this optimal range for all power 
levels, the speed of the main feed pumps is controlled to overcome the feedwater 
system dynamic losses (head losses), which vary with the feedwater flow and valve 
position.  As a result, the pressure at the discharge of the pumps varies, and the 
differential pressure across the feedwater regulating valves changes.  Controlling 
the feed pump speed also reduces regulating valve wear by allowing the valves to 
be further open with low feedwater flow rates and increases pump efficiency by 
reducing pump power requirements.  The main feed pump speed control system is 
shown in Figure 11.1-3. 
 
The feed pump speed is controlled by the differential pressure error generated 
through a comparison of programmed differential pressure and actual differential 
pressure.  The programmed differential pressure is generated by summing the 
pressure-compensated steam flows from all four steam generators and sending 
them to a setpoint generator, which has a no-load setpoint as a starting point.  The 
output of the setpoint generator is the programmed differential pressure, which has 
a range of 45 -195 psid from no load to full power.  The programmed differential 
pressure is then compared to the actual differential pressure.  The lag unit on the 
output of the steam flow summer slows the system response to rapid changes in 
steam flow.  This feature allows the main feed regulating valves, not the feed 
pumps, to be the primary components controlling steam generator level. 
 
The actual differential pressure is the difference between steam header pressure 
and feed header pressure.  The steam header pressure is sensed in the bypass 
header of the main steam system.  The feed header pressure is measured in the 
combined header downstream of the high pressure heaters.  The programmed 
differential pressure and the actual differential pressure are compared in a summer 
to produce the differential pressure error.  A positive error (actual differential 
pressure less than programmed differential pressure) would call for an increase in 
feed pump speed.  This error is sent to the master pump speed (PI) controller, which 
eliminates steady-state errors and sends an output to the individual feed pump 
speed controllers. 
 
 
11.1.3 Instrumentation 
 
11.1.3.1 Level Channels  
 
There are four level detectors for each steam generator (see Figure 11.1-4), three 
protection-grade narrow-range transmitters and one wide-range transmitter.  The 
span of each narrow-range detector is the top 12 ft of the wide-range span.  Each 
narrow-range detector=s upper tap (100% narrow-range level) is located just below 
an upper manway, and the lower tap (0% narrow-range level) is located 26 in. above 
the top of the U-tube bundle.  Each detector supplies control board indication and 
level alarms. 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 11.1-5 Rev 0706 
The narrow-range detectors generate a reactor trip for loss of heat sink protection 
when at least two out of the three channels indicate a low-low level (11.5%) in any 
steam generator.  In addition, the low-low level condition starts the auxiliary 
feedwater pumps.  A reactor trip for anticipated loss of heat sink is generated when 
steam flow exceeds feed flow by 1.51 X 10
6 lbm/hr in one of the two steam flow/feed 
flow comparisons developed for a steam generator, coincident with a low level of 
25.5% in one of two level channels for that generator.  (The narrow-range level 
channel which provides an input to the feedwater control system does not provide 
an input to the protection logic for the second reactor trip.) 
 
The narrow-range detectors also generate a turbine trip if two out of the three 
channels exceed the high-high level setpoint (69%) in any steam generator.  This 
condition also generates a main feedwater isolation signal and trips the main feed 
pumps.  The purpose of this turbine trip is for protection of the turbine blades from 
excessive moisture carryover.  
 
The fourth level detector for each steam generator is the wide-range channel (not 
shown in Figure 11.1-1).  This instrument provides indication of wide range level and 
is recorded in the main control room.  The location of the lower tap of this detector is 
one foot above the steam generator tube sheet.  The span of the detector is 48 ft.  
The wide-range level detectors are addressed by the Westinghouse emergency 
operating procedures and are used by the operator for verification of a loss of heat 
sink.  
 
11.1.3.2 Turbine First-Stage Pressure  
 
One of the two turbine first-stage (impulse) pressure transmitters is used to generate 
the reference steam generator level.  Since this pressure is proportional to power, 
steam generator level is effectively programmed as a function of power.  
  
11.1.3.3 Steam Flow Channels 
 
Two steam flow channels for each steam generator can provide an input to the 
feedwater control system; the operator selects one with a switch on the main control 
board.  Each detector=s flow signal is developed from the ΔP sensed across the flow 
restrictor at the outlet of the steam generator.  Because steam is a compressible 
fluid and its density varies with pressure, the steam flows are pressure compensated 
to account for density variations.  Each steam flow channel is compensated by a 
separate steam pressure channel.  
 
In addition to providing an input to the feedwater control system, each steam flow 
detector provides an input to the protection logic for (1) the reactor trip for 
anticipated loss of heat sink (see Section 11.1.3.1) and (2) the high steam flow 
safety injection actuation and steam line isolation.  Each steam flow channel also 
supplies control board indication and a steam flow/feed flow mismatch alarm. 
 
11.1.3.4 Feedwater Flow Channels  
 
Two feedwater flow channels for each steam generator can provide an input to the 
feedwater control system; the operator selects one with a switch on the main control 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 11.1-6 Rev 0706 
board.  Each detector=s flow signal is developed from the ΔP sensed across the 
venturi downstream of the feedwater regulating valve. 
 
In addition to providing an input to the feedwater control system, each feed flow 
detector provides an input to the protection logic for the reactor trip for anticipated 
loss of heat sink (see Section 11.1.3.1).  Each feed flow channel also supplies 
control board indication and a steam flow/feed flow mismatch alarm. 
 
11.1.3.5 Steam Pressure Channels 
 
Four steam pressure detectors per steam generator are located on the steam line 
just outside containment and upstream of the main steam isolation valve.  One of 
these detectors is dedicated solely to the control of the steam generator 
atmospheric relief valve.  The other three channels are protection-grade channels.  
They provide inputs to the protection logic for (1) the high steam line differential 
pressure safety injection actuation and (2) the high steam flow safety injection 
actuation and steam line isolation.  Two of the protection-grade channels provide 
density compensation for separate steam flow channels.  All protection-grade steam 
line pressure channels provide control board indication. 
 
A steam pressure detector on the common bypass header which cross-connects the 
four main steam lines provides inputs to the feed pump speed control system and to 
the steam dump control system.  This detector provides indication on the control 
board. 
 
11.1.3.6 Feedwater Pressure Channel  
 
A pressure transmitter on the common feedwater header downstream of the high 
pressure heaters provides an input to the feed pump speed control system.  This 
detector also provides indication on the control board. 
 
 
11.1.4 System Interrelationships 
 
Four inputs override the steam generator water level control system: 
 
$ Manual control by the operator, 
$ Reactor trip (P-4) coincident with low T
avg, 
$ Steam generator high level (P-14), and 
$ Safety injection actuation signal. 
 
Each of the last three conditions listed above generates a feedwater isolation signal, 
which causes automatic closure of all feed regulating and bypass valves (if open) 
and main feedwater isolation valves.  Each of the last two conditions directly trips 
the main feed pumps and the main turbine. 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
USNRC HRTD 11.1-7 Rev 0706 
11.1.5 Summary  
 
Steam generator water level is controlled through the automatic or manual operation 
of the main feed regulating valves (at high powers), or through the manual operation 
of the main feed regulating valve bypass valves (at low powers).  In addition, the 
speed of the main feed pumps is controlled through the maintenance of a 
programmed differential pressure across the steam generators to maintain efficient 
operation of the main feed regulating valves.  The detectors used in the control 
systems provide signals for control, protection, and indication. 
 
---PAGE---
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 

---PAGE---
 
 
 

---PAGE---
