 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westinghouse Technology Systems Manual 
 
Section 1.2 
 
Introduction to Pressurized Water Reactor Generating Systems 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 1.2-i Rev 0107 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1.2 INTRODUCTION TO PRESSURIZE D WATER REACTOR GENERATING 
SYSTEMS ................................................................................................. 1.2-1 
 
1.2.1 General Description ........................................................................... 1.2-1  
 
1.2.2 Primary Cycle (Reactor Coolant System) .......................................... 1.2-1  
 
1.2.3 Secondary Cycle (Power Conversion System) .................................. 1.2-2 
 
1.2.4 Support and Emer gency Systems ..................................................... 1.2-3 
 
1.2.5 Plant Layout (Figure 1.2-2) ................................................................ 1.2-4  
 
1.2.6 Plant Control ...................................................................................... 1.2-5  
 
1.2.7 Reactor Control ................................................................................. 1.2-5  
 
1.2.7.1 Constant T avg Control Mode ........................................................ 1.2-6 
1.2.7.2 Constant Steam Pressure Control Mode .................................... 1.2-7 
1.2.7.3 Sliding T avg Control Mode ........................................................... 1.2-7 
 
1.2.8 Summary ........................................................................................... 1.2-8 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
1.2-1  ....................................................................................................................... Plant Systems 
1.2-2  ........................................................................................................................ .. Plant Layout 
1.2-3  .............................................Characteristics of a Cons tant Average Temperature Program 
1.2-4  ...................................................... Characteristics of a C onstant Steam Pressure Program 
1.2-5  ................................................ Characteristics of a S liding Average Temperature Program 
 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE---
 
 
USNRC HRTD 1.2-ii Rev 0107 
---PAGE---
 
  
USNRC HRTD 1.2-1 Rev 0107 
1.2 INTRODUCTION TO PRESSURIZE D WATER REACTOR GENERATING 
SYSTEMS 
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. Define the following terms: 
 
a. Primary cycle, 
b. Secondary cycle, and 
c. Reactor coolant system (RCS) average temperature (T
avg). 
 
2. Explain why T avg is programmed to increase with an increasing plant load. 
 
1.2.1 General Description  
 
The pressurized water reactor (PWR) generating system described in this manual is 
a dual cycle unit.  The two cycles are called the primary and the secondary.  As 
shown in Figure 1.2-1, the unit consists of a primary cycle that includes the reactor 
vessel, the pressurizer, and four closed reactor coolant loops connected in parallel 
(of which only one loop is shown).  The secondary cycle includes the steam system, 
the high and low pressure turbines, and the condensate and feedwater system.  The 
secondary systems together are sometimes referred to as the power conversion 
system.  The sole function of the power conversion system is to generate electricity. 
   
As shown, the primary cycle is located entirely inside the containment building.  This 
building is designed to act as a shield to minimize the exposure of plant personnel to 
radiation.  In addition, the design of the containment structure prevents or minimizes 
the release of radioactive material to the environment during normal operation or 
under an accident condition.  The use of a dual cycle design reduces the amount of 
radioactive material transferred to the power conversion system components.  By 
minimizing the amount of radioactivity transferred to the secondary, the potential 
exposure of plant personnel is reduced, and any potential releases of radioactive 
material to the atmosphere are minimized. 
1.2.2 Primary Cycle (Reactor Coolant System) 
  
Each of the four reactor coolant loops contains a reactor coolant pump, a steam 
generator, piping, and associated instrumentation.  Attached to one of the four loops 
is an electrically heated pressurizer.  The pressurizer maintains the pressure of the 
reactor coolant at a high value, which prevents the high temperature (>500EF) 
coolant from boiling.  Reactor coolant (pure water with boric acid in solution) is 
pumped through the reactor core to remove the heat generated by nuclear fission.  
The heated water exits the reactor vessel, passes through loop piping and enters the 
steam generator. 
   
---PAGE---
 
  
USNRC HRTD 1.2-2 Rev 0107 
Inside the steam generator, reactor coolant flows through U-tubes and transfers heat 
to the feedwater inside the steam generator (secondary system).  The U-tubes act 
as a barrier between the primary and secondary cycles.  Reactor coolant, now 
cooler, exits the steam generator and is directed to the suction of the reactor coolant 
pump.  The reactor coolant pump returns the reactor coolant to the reactor vessel, 
completing the primary cycle.  
1.2.3 Secondary Cycle (Power Conversion System)  
 
The power conversion system begins in the shell sides of the four steam generators.  
At these locations the feedwater contacts the U-tubes and picks up heat from the hot 
reactor coolant.  Since the pressure in the secondary side is less than that of the 
primary, the heated feedwater boils and becomes saturated steam.  Saturated 
steam is steam that is at the same temperature as boiling water for a given pressure. 
The saturated steam produced in the shell sides of the steam generators exits via 
the main steam lines.  The steam flows through the main steam line isolation valves 
(MSIVs) to the high pressure turbine.  After flowing through the high pressure 
turbine, the low-energy, moisture-laden steam is routed to the moisture separator 
reheaters (MSRs).  Each MSR, as its name implies, removes moisture from this low 
pressure steam and reheats it.  The moisture-free steam is superheated by 
extraction steam from the high pressure turbine and by steam from the main steam 
lines.  Superheated steam is steam that is at a temperature which is greater than the 
saturation temperature for a given pressure. The dry, superheated steam is directed 
to the low pressure turbines.  This steam passes through the low pressure turbine 
blades and exits to the main condenser.  The high and low pressure turbines are 
mounted on a common shaft that drives the main generator.  
 
The main generator produces electrical power, which is supplied to the utility=s 
distribution network or Agrid.@   
 
Inside the condenser, the exhausted steam is condensed (cooled and 
depressurized) by passing over tubes containing water from the condenser 
circulating water system.  The condensed steam (now called condensate) is 
collected in the condenser=s hotwell.  The condensate is pumped from the 
condenser hotwell by condensate pumps.  The condensate pumps discharge the 
condensate through condensate demineralizers, which remove impurities.  The 
condensate then passes through several stages of low pressure feedwater heaters, 
in which the temperature of the condensate is increased by heat transfer from steam 
extracted from the low pressure turbines.  The condensate exits the low pressure 
feedwater heaters and enters the suctions of the high pressure main feedwater 
pumps.   
 
The main feedwater pumps (normally driven by steam turbines) increase the 
pressure of the condensate (now called feedwater) so that it can enter the steam 
generators.  From the discharge of the main feedwater pumps, the feedwater is 
heated in the high pressure feedwater heaters by extraction steam from the high 
---PAGE---
 
  
USNRC HRTD 1.2-3 Rev 0107 
pressure turbine.  After this final heating, the feedwater passes through the 
feedwater regulating valves (FRVs), enters the containment, and finally enters the 
steam generators, thereby completing the secondary cycle. 
1.2.4 Support and Emergency Systems 
 
Attached to each reactor coolant loop cold leg is an accumulator, pressurized with 
nitrogen.  The purpose of the accumulator is to inject borated water into the RCS if 
the reactor coolant system pressure boundary ruptures; i.e., a loss of coolant 
accident (LOCA) occurs.   
 
When the pressure in the RCS drops below the pressure in the accumulators, the 
nitrogen forces the borated water out of the accumulators into the RCS, providing 
both water to cover and cool the reactor core and boron (a neutron absorber) to 
keep the reactor shut down. 
 
The residual heat removal (RHR) system is designed to provide both safety-related 
and nonsafety-related functions.   Its safety-related function is to provide borated 
water at a low pressure and a high flow rate to the RCS following a loss of coolant 
accident.   The RHR system pumps water from the refueling water storage tank 
(RWST) to the RCS for the short term and recycles water from the containment 
building sump back into the reactor coolant system for long term cooling.  Its 
nonsafety-related function is to remove decay heat from the core after a shutdown.  
Decay heat removal is accomplished by pumping hot water from an RCS hot leg 
through heat exchangers and then back into the RCS via the cold legs.  
 
The safety injection (SI) system is another emergency core cooling system located 
in the auxiliary building.  Its function is to inject borated water from the RWST into 
the RCS after a LOCA.  Although the SI system discharge capacity is much less 
than that of the RHR system, its discharge pressure is greater. 
 
The chemical and volume control system (CVCS) maintains the purity of the reactor 
coolant by means of demineralizer beds that continuously purify a small letdown 
stream from the RCS.  This purified water is charged back into the RCS at a 
controlled rate to maintain the proper volume of water in the RCS.  The CVCS 
charging pumps also serve as the high pressure safety injection pumps.  Their 
function is to supply borated water to the RCS in emergency situations. 
 
In the event of a LOCA, the hot reactor coolant spills from the RCS into the 
containment and flashes to steam.  This action causes a pressure increase inside 
the containment building. 
 
The containment spray system is designed to transfer water from the refueling water 
storage tank to spray rings located high inside containment.  The cool water sprayed 
into the containment quenches the steam and maintains the pressure inside of the 
containment within design limits.  This action prevents the rupture of the containment 
---PAGE---
 
  
USNRC HRTD 1.2-4 Rev 0107 
building and the subsequent uncontrolled release of radioactive materials to the 
environment. 
 
The component cooling water (CCW) system provides a cooling medium to various 
components, such as the CVCS letdown heat exchanger and the RHR heat 
exchangers.  This system is a closed loop system and is cooled by the service water 
system (SWS), which receives its water from a nearby river, lake, or ocean.  Both of 
these systems (CCW system and SWS) are safety systems and are required to 
function in order to mitigate the consequences of analyzed accidents. 
1.2.5 Plant Layout (Figure 1.2-2)  
 
The entire RCS, including the steam generators, is located within the containment 
building.  This structure isolates the radioactive reactor coolant from the environment 
in the event of a leak or a loss of coolant accident.  The containment building is 
designed to withstand the pressure resulting from the complete rupture of a reactor 
coolant pipe or main steam line.  The containment must be able to perform this 
safety function during and following a Adesign basis earthquake.@  The containment 
building is therefore designated as a Seismic Category I structure.  
  
A "design basis earthquake" (also called a "safe shutdown earthquake@) is defined in 
10 CFR Part 100, Appendix A, of the Code of Federal Regulations as the maximum 
ground motion potential considering local and regional geology and seismology.  It is 
that earthquake which produces the maximum vibratory ground motion for which 
certain structures, systems, and components are designed to remain functional.  
"Safety-related" systems, structures, and components designed to remain functional 
during a design basis earthquake are designated "Seismic Category I." 
 
Safety-related and potentially radioactive auxiliary systems are located inside the 
Seismic Category I auxiliary building.  This building is normally located between the 
turbine building and the containment building.  Ventilation from the auxiliary building 
is passed through high efficiency particulate filters and/or charcoal filters to minimize 
the release of radioactive material to the environment. A fuel storage building 
(sometimes a part of the auxiliary building) is provided for the handling and storage 
of new and spent reactor fuel.  The fuel storage building is also designated as a 
Seismic Category I building.  The control building (also sometimes part of the 
auxiliary building) is a Seismic Category I structure, which houses the main control 
room, the cable spreading room, the auxiliary instrument room, the plant computer, 
and the battery rooms. 
   
The turbine building is not safety related and contains most of the secondary cycle 
equipment and secondary support systems.  The main turbine, moisture separator 
reheaters, main condenser, condensate and feedwater pumps, and feedwater 
heaters are all located inside the turbine building. 
---PAGE---
 
  
USNRC HRTD 1.2-5 Rev 0107 
1.2.6 Plant Control  
 
The power output of the reactor and the outlet temperature of the coolant from the 
reactor core are controlled by manipulating several factors which affect the core=s 
reactivity (a measure of neutron population change).  The position of neutron 
absorbing control rods, the concentration of boric acid in the RCS, and the steam 
flow rate can be changed to affect reactor power and the coolant outlet temperature. 
 
The automatic control systems are designed to provide power change (load change) 
capability between 15% and 100% of rated power at 5% per minute (ramp) or with a 
10% instantaneous (step) change in power without causing an automatic reactor 
shutdown (trip).  Additionally, the plant=s steam dump system is designed to direct 
steam at a high rate of flow to the main condenser, allowing  the unit to accept a 
large power reduction (load rejection) without tripping the reactor. 
 
The power level of the reactor is normally changed by selecting a desired electrical 
load and load rate via the turbine control system and allowing the reactor to follow 
the turbine load change.  Various methods are possible for controlling the reactor=s 
power, as the turbine load is changed, and are discussed below. 
1.2.7 Reactor Control 
 
The basic formula defining heat (or power) transferred across a heat exchanger (in 
this case, the steam generators) is:  
 
QU A T
•
=Δ  
 
where: 
Q
•
     = the rate of heat transfer, 
U       = the heat transfer coefficient, 
A       =  the area of heat transfer, and 
ΔT     =  the differential temperature across the heat exchanger (in this case, 
the difference between the average temperature of the reactor coolant 
[Tavg] and the temperature of the steam [Tstm]). 
 
For all practical purposes, both the heat transfer coefficient (U) and the heat transfer 
area (A) are constant, since the heat transfer coefficient is a function of the materials 
used in the construction of the steam generator and the U-tubes are completely 
covered with water.  The equation may be reduced to: 
 
QT
•
∝Δ  , or 
QT T avg stm
•
∝− ()  
---PAGE---
 
  
USNRC HRTD 1.2-6 Rev 0107 
 
There are three basic modes of controlling a pressurized water reactor with U-tube 
steam generators.  Each of these modes of control could be used to adjust reactor 
power in response to changes in one of two measurable parameters. These 
parameters are as follows: 
 
1. T
avg - the average reactor coolant system temperature:  
 
  
T
TT
avg
hc
=
+
2   
  where: 
 
  Th = hot leg temperature, and 
       Tc = cold leg temperature. 
 
2. Steam pressure - the secondary steam pressure either at the outlet of the 
steam generator or the inlet to the main turbine.  
1.2.7.1 Constant T avg Control Mode   
 
With a constant T avg control scheme (Figure 1.2-3), the reactivity of the core is 
adjusted to maintain a constant reactor c oolant average temperature as turbine load 
is varied.  For example, increasing the output of the turbine causes a decrease in 
T
avg, because the turbine uses more energy than that produced by the reactor.  The 
rod control system senses this temperature decrease and withdraws the control 
rods, adding positive reactivity to the core and returning T
avg to the programmed 
value. An anticipatory signal comparing turbine load and reactor power might also be 
utilized to optimize the transient response of this control scheme.   
 
The constant T
avg control mode has the advantage of an unchanging RCS 
temperature and density, regardless of power level.  Since the coolant volume does 
not change, the pressurizer level is constant for all load conditions. 
 
A major disadvantage of the constant T
avg control is that it produces an unacceptable 
secondary system pressure when the turbine is fully loaded.  As shown above, the 
rate of heat transfer from the reactor coolant across the steam generator tubes to 
produce steam is proportional to the differential temperature between the reactor 
coolant and the secondary water.  If the reactor coolant T
avg remains constant, then 
the saturation temperature (Tstm) in the shell side (secondary) of each steam 
generator must drop when the steam demand (load) increases.  This effect produces 
a significant decrease in steam pressure (P
stm) as secondary power is increased 
from hot zero power to full load.  The low steam pressure produces unacceptable 
steam conditions at the main turbine inlet.   
 
---PAGE---
 
  
USNRC HRTD 1.2-7 Rev 0107 
Large PWR generating stations with U-tube steam generators do not use constant 
Tavg control. The advantage of a constant pressurizer level is greatly offset by the 
disadvantage of low steam pressure.  
1.2.7.2 Constant Steam Pressure Control Mode  
 
With a constant steam pressure control scheme (Figure 1.2-4), the reactivity of the 
reactor core is adjusted to maintain a constant pressure in the steam system as 
turbine load is changed.  As described in the previous section, increasing turbine 
load causes steam pressure (P
stm) to decrease.  The rod control system would 
sense this decrease in Pstm and withdraw control rods to increase the reactor coolant 
temperature. 
  
With this type of reactor control, the ΔT between primary and secondary is increased 
by raising T
avg and allowing Tstm (and therefore Pstm) to remain constant.  This 
produces ideal steam conditions at the main turbine inlet for all loads from hot zero 
power to 100% load. 
 
The disadvantage of this type of control scheme is that it results in a high reactor 
outlet (hot leg) temperature (T
h), which approaches saturation values.  The constant 
steam pressure control may be used in other PWR vendor designs but is impractical 
for plants with U-tube steam generators. 
1.2.7.3 Sliding T
avg Control Mode   
    
A sliding T avg control scheme (Figure 1.2-5) is a compromise between a constant 
Tavg and a constant steam pressure control scheme.  This control scheme 
incorporates the advantages of both but also retains some of their disadvantages. 
 
With a sliding (programmed) T
avg control scheme, the reactivity in the reactor core is 
adjusted to maintain a programmed T avg as the turbine load is varied.  As with the 
previously described control schemes, varying the load on the turbine causes T avg 
and steam pressure to change. To compensate, the rod control system repositions 
the control rods to add positive or negative reactivity to the reactor core and maintain 
T
avg equal to its programmed value for a given load.  
 
The heat transfer rate from the primary cycle to the secondary cycle is directly 
proportional to the value of the temperature difference ( ΔT) between the primary and 
the secondary.  This ΔT is also a direct indication of power.  As shown in Figure 1.2-
5, as secondary power increases, the difference between T
avg and T stm increases.  
The ΔT increases with an increasing load on the turbine generator as (1) the turbine 
control valves open (causing the steam pressure to decrease), and (2) control rods 
withdraw or operators dilute the reactor coolant (adding positive reactivity and 
increasing reactor coolant temperature). 
 
---PAGE---
 
  
USNRC HRTD 1.2-8 Rev 0107 
This mode of control produces acceptable steam conditions at the main turbine inlet 
at 100% power, while requiring a lower T h than does the constant steam pressure 
control mode. Most Westinghouse designed nuclear units use some form of a sliding 
T
avg control program.  One difference in the various control programs is the value of 
the programmed range of temperature control.  The programmed temperature range 
varies from 12°F to the most often used value of 30°F.  Another difference is in the 
value of the no-load setpoint (the programmed T
avg at 0% power).  The most 
commonly used values of no-load Tavg are 547°F and 557°F. 
 
 
1.2.8 Summary  
 
Pressurized water reactor units use a dual cycle concept, in which the closed 
primary cycle is separate from the secondary cycle.  The point of heat transfer 
between the two cycles is the steam generator(s).  The RCS is the primary cycle and 
is located inside the containment building.  The secondary cycle includes the steam 
system, the turbine generator (where steam energy is used to generate electric 
power), and the condensate and feedwater systems.  Secondary cycle systems, 
subsystems, and components are principally located in the turbine building. 
 
Support and emergency systems serve many purposes affecting both the primary 
and the secondary.  Systems, components, structures, and buildings which have 
safety functions or are required to maintain the integrity of the RCS or the reactor 
core, under accident conditions, must be built to Seismic Category I standards.  
Safety systems, components, and structures built to Seismic Category I 
specifications will provide their intended safety functions during the maximum 
credible seismic event. 
 
The constant T
avg and constant steam pressure reactor control modes are viable 
control modes but are not generally used at Westinghouse designed plants.  The 
control scheme most often selected to control the reactor is the sliding Tavg control 
mode. This mode of control programs Tavg to increase as secondary load increases. 
The sliding Tavg mode is a compromise between the other two modes of control and 
contains some of the advantages and disadvantages of each.
---PAGE---
 
   
1101-329
1.2-1; 1-2
Figure1 . 2-1 Plant S ystems Composite
---PAGE---
 
   
 
0199-3
Figure 1.2-2 Plant La yout
---PAGE---
 
   
 
PRESSURIZER
REACTOR
VESSEL
STEAM
GENERATOR
THOT
TCOLD
REACTOR
COOLANT
PUMP FEED
PUMP
HOTWELL
CONDENSER
MAIN
TURBINE GENERATOR
CONDENSER
CIRCULATING
WATER
CONDENSATE
PUMP
557°F
1092# Pstm
557° Tavg
FULL
POWER
POWER OUTPUTHOT ZERO
POWER
588° Th
527° Tc
514° Tstm
751# Pstm
Figure 1.2-3 Characteristics of a Constant AverageT e mperature Program
0599-3
---PAGE---
 
   
PRESSURIZER
REACTOR
VESSEL
STEAM
GENERATOR
THOT
TCOLD
REACTOR
COOLANT
PUMP FEED
PUMP
HOTWELL
CONDENSER
MAIN
TURBINE GENERATOR
CONDENSER
CIRCULATING
WATER
CONDENSATE
PUMP
557°F
1092# Pstm
600° Tavg
FULL
POWER
POWER OUTPUTHOT ZERO
POWER
630° Th
570° Tc
557° Tstm
1092# Pstm
Figure1 . 2-4 Characteristics of a Constant Steam PressureP rogram
0599-3
---PAGE---
 
   
PRESSURIZER
REACTOR
VESSEL
STEAM
GENERATOR
THOT
TCOLD
REACTOR
COOLANT
PUMP FEED
PUMP
HOTWELL
CONDENSER
MAIN
TURBINE GENERATOR
CONDENSER
CIRCULATING
WATER
CONDENSATE
PUMP
557°F
1092# Pstm
585° Tavg
FULL
POWER
POWER OUTPUTHOT ZERO
POWER
617° Th
556° Tc
541° Tstm
950# Pstm
Figure1 . 2-5 Characteristics of a Sliding Average TemperatureP rogram
0199-3
 
---PAGE---
